Hypatia
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
For other uses, see Hypatia (disambiguation).
Hypatia
Born 	c. AD 351–370
Alexandria
Died 	415[1]
Alexandria
Era 	Ancient philosophy
Region 	Western philosophy
School 	Neoplatonism
Main interests
	

    Mathematics
    Astronomy

Influences[show]
Influenced[show]

Hypatia (/haɪˈpeɪʃiə/ hy-PAY-sh(ee)ə or /haɪˈpætiə/ hy-PAT-ee-ə;[2] Greek: Ὑπατία Hypatía) (born c. AD 350 – 370; died 415[1][3]) was a mathematician, astronomer, and philosopher in Egypt, then a part of the Byzantine Empire.[4] She was the head of the Neoplatonic school at Alexandria, where she taught philosophy and astronomy.[5][6][7][8]

According to contemporary sources, Hypatia was murdered by a Christian mob after being accused of exacerbating a conflict between two prominent figures in Alexandria: the governor Orestes and the Bishop of Alexandria.[9]

Contents

    1 Life
    2 Death
        2.1 Scholasticus' account
        2.2 The account given in the Chronicle of John of Nikiu
        2.3 Comparison of the two accounts
    3 Works
    4 Legacy
        4.1 Late Antiquity to the Age of Reason
        4.2 19th century
        4.3 20th century
        4.4 21st century
    5 Notes
    6 References
    7 Further reading
    8 External links

Life

The mathematician and philosopher Hypatia of Alexandria was the daughter of the mathematician Theon Alexandricus (c. 335 – c. 405).[10] She was educated at Athens. Around AD 400, she became head of the Platonist school at Alexandria,[11][12][13] where she imparted the knowledge of Plato and Aristotle to students, including pagans, Christians, and foreigners.[4][14][15]

Although contemporary 5th-century sources identify Hypatia of Alexandria as a practitioner and teacher of the philosophy of Plato and Plotinus, two hundred years later, the 7th-century Egyptian Coptic bishop John of Nikiû identified her as a Hellenistic pagan and that "she was devoted at all times to magic, astrolabes and instruments of music, and she beguiled many people through her Satanic wiles".[16][17] However, not all Christians were as hostile towards her: some Christians even used Hypatia as symbolic of Virtue.[4] The contemporary Christian historiographer Socrates Scholasticus described her in Ecclesiastical History:
“ 	There was a woman at Alexandria named Hypatia, daughter of the philosopher Theon, who made such attainments in literature and science, as to far surpass all the philosophers of her own time. Having succeeded to the school of Plato and Plotinus, she explained the principles of philosophy to her auditors, many of whom came from a distance to receive her instructions. On account of the self-possession and ease of manner which she had acquired in consequence of the cultivation of her mind, she not infrequently appeared in public in the presence of the magistrates. Neither did she feel abashed in going to an assembly of men. For all men on account of her extraordinary dignity and virtue admired her the more.[4] 	”

—Socrates Scholasticus, Ecclesiastical History

Hypatia corresponded with former pupil Synesius of Cyrene, who was tutored by her in the philosophical school of Platonism and later became bishop of Ptolemais in AD 410, an exponent of the Christian Holy Trinity doctrine.[18] Together with the references by the pagan philosopher Damascius, these are the extant records left by Hypatia's pupils at the Platonist school of Alexandria.[19] The Byzantine Suda encyclopaedia reported that Hypatia was "the wife of Isidore the Philosopher" (apparently Isidore of Alexandria);[14] however, Isidore of Alexandria was not born until long after Hypatia's death, and no other philosopher of that name contemporary with Hypatia is known.[20] The Suda also stated that "she remained a virgin" and that she rejected a suitor with her menstrual rags, saying that they demonstrated that there is "nothing beautiful" about carnal desire—an example of a Christian source using Hypatia as a symbol of Virtue.[14][21][22]
Death
"Death of the philosopher Hypatia, in Alexandria" from Vies des savants illustres, depuis l'antiquité jusqu'au dix-neuvième siècle, 1866, by Louis Figuier.

Two widely cited but divergent texts describe the feud between Orestes, the prefect (or Governor) of Alexandria and Cyril, the Bishop of Alexandria. The feud and the city-wide anger it provoked ultimately brought about the death of Hypatia. Kathleen Wider proposes that the murder of Hypatia marked the end of Classical antiquity,[23] and Stephen Greenblatt observes that her murder "effectively marked the downfall of Alexandrian intellectual life".[24] On the other hand, Christian Wildberg notes that Hellenistic philosophy continued to flourish in the 5th and 6th centuries, and perhaps until the age of Justinian.[25]
Scholasticus' account

One source, the Historia Ecclesiastica (or "Ecclesiastical History"), was written by Socrates Scholasticus (who was himself a Christian), some time shortly after Hypatia's death in AD 415. Scholasticus gives the more complete, less biased account of the feud between Orestes and Cyril and of the role Hypatia played in the feud that resulted in her death.

The other source, The Chronicle,[26] written by John of Nikiu in Egypt around 650 AD, demonizes Hypatia and Orestes directly, while validating all Christians involved in the events Nikiu describes. The Chronicle is more biased on the matter of the historical feud, omitting several points of the narrative that are included in Scholasticus's account.[27]

Orestes, the Roman governor of Alexandria, and Cyril, the Bishop of Alexandria, were involved in a bitter feud in which Hypatia became one of the main points of contention. In 415 AD, the feud began over Jewish dancing exhibitions in Alexandria. Because the exhibitions attracted large crowds and were commonly prone to civil disorder of varying degrees, Orestes published an edict that outlined new regulations for such gatherings. When crowds gathered to read the edict shortly after it was posted in the city's theater, it angered Christians as well as Jews. At one such gathering, Hierax, a devout Christian follower of Cyril, read the edict and applauded the new regulations. Many people felt Hierax was attempting to incite the crowd into sedition. Orestes reacted swiftly and violently out of what Scholasticus suspected was "jealousy [of] the growing power of the bishops…[which] encroached on the jurisdiction of the authorities". He ordered Hierax to be seized and tortured publicly in the theater.

Hearing of Hierax's severe and public punishment, Cyril threatened to retaliate against the Jews of Alexandria with "the utmost severities" if the harassment of Christians did not cease immediately. In response to Cyril's threat, the Jews of Alexandria grew even more furious, eventually resorting to violence against the Christians. They plotted to flush the Christians out at night by running through the streets claiming that the Church of Alexander was on fire. When Christians responded to what they were led to believe was the burning down of their church, "the Jews immediately fell upon and slew them" by using rings to recognize one another in the dark and killing everyone else in sight. When the morning came, the Jews of Alexandria could not hide their guilt, and Cyril, along with many of his followers, took to the city's synagogues in search of the perpetrators of the massacre.

After Cyril rounded up all the Jews in Alexandria, he ordered them to be stripped of all possessions, banished them from Alexandria, and allowed their goods to be pillaged by the remaining citizens of Alexandria. With Cyril's banishment of the Jews, "Orestes [...] was filled with great indignation at these transactions, and was excessively grieved that a city of such magnitude should have been suddenly bereft of so large a portion of its population." Because of this, the feud between Cyril and Orestes intensified, and both men wrote to the emperor regarding the situation. Eventually, Cyril attempted to reach out to Orestes through several peace overtures, including attempted mediation and, when that failed, in an appeal to Orestes's allegiances as a Christian Roman,[28] showing the Gospels to him. Nevertheless, Orestes remained unmoved by such gestures.

Meanwhile, approximately 500 monks who resided in the mountains of Nitria, and who were "of a very fiery disposition", heard of the ongoing feud between the Governor and Bishop and descended into Alexandria armed and prepared to fight alongside Cyril. Upon their arrival, the monks intercepted Orestes's chariot and proceeded to bombard and harass him, calling him a pagan idolater. In response to such allegations, Orestes countered that he was actually a Christian and had even been baptized by Atticus, the Bishop of Constantinople. The monks paid little attention to Orestes's claims of Christianity, and one of the monks, Ammonius, struck Orestes in the head with a rock, causing him to bleed profusely. At this point, although Orestes's guards fled in fear, a nearby crowd of Alexandrians came to his aid. Ammonius was subsequently secured and ordered to be tortured for his actions. He died of the torture.

Following the death of Ammonius, Cyril ordered that he henceforth be remembered as a martyr. Such a proclamation did not sit well with "sober-minded" Christians, as Scholasticus pointed out, seeing that he "suffered the punishment due to his rashness he would not deny Christ". This fact, according to Scholasticus, became apparent to Cyril through general lack of enthusiasm for Ammonius's case for martyrdom.

Scholasticus then introduces Hypatia, the female philosopher of Alexandria and the woman who would become a target of the Christian anger that was inflamed during the feud. Daughter of Theon, and a teacher trained in the philosophical schools of Plato and Plotinus, she was admired by most for her dignity and virtue. Of the anger she provoked among Christians, Scholasticus writes, Hypatia ultimately fell "victim to the political jealousy which at the time prevailed". Orestes was known to seek her counsel, and a rumor spread among the Christian community of Alexandria blaming her for Orestes's unwillingness to reconcile with Cyril. A mob of Christians gathered, led by a reader (i.e., a minor cleric) named Peter, whom Scholasticus calls a fanatic. They kidnapped Hypatia on her way home and took her to the "Church called Caesareum. They then completely stripped her, and then murdered her with tiles." Socrates Scholasticus was hence interpreted as saying that, while she was still alive, Hypatia's flesh was torn off using oyster shells (tiles; the Greek word is ostrakois, which literally means "with or by oystershells"[29] but the word was also used for brick tiles on the roofs of houses and for pottery sherds). Afterward, the men proceeded to mutilate her and, finally, burn her limbs. News of Hypatia's murder provoked great public denouncement, not only against Cyril, but against the whole Alexandrian Christian community. Scholasticus closes with a lament: "Surely nothing can be farther from the spirit of Christianity than the allowance of massacres, fights, and transactions of that sort."
The account given in the Chronicle of John of Nikiu

Bishop John of Nikiu, who lived several hundred years after the events he describes, writes bitterly of Hypatia, claiming that "she beguiled many people through (her) Satanic wiles".[30] Orestes, who Nikiu writes was himself a victim of Hypatia's demonic charm, regularly honored her and took to abandoning the Christian Church in order to follow her teachings more closely. Moreover, the Bishop claimed that Orestes himself persuaded others to leave the Church in favor of Hypatia's philosophical teachings and went as far as to host such "unbelievers" at his house.

One day, Orestes published an edict "regarding public exhibitions in the city of Alexandria" and all citizens gathered to read the edict. Cyril, curious to see why the edict caused such an uproar, sent Hierax, a "Christian possessing understanding and intelligence", who, although opposed to paganism, did as Cyril asked and went to learn the nature of Orestes's edict. Meanwhile, the Jews who gathered in anger over the edict believed that Hierax had come only for the sake of provocation (which, according to Scholasticus's text, was Hierax's intent). Upon this assumption, Orestes had Hierax punished for a crime for which "he was wholly guiltless".

For the punishment and torture of Hierax, as well as the death of several monks, including Ammonius, Cyril grew increasingly furious with Orestes. (Here, Nikiu blatantly ignores the assault on Orestes by the 500 monks, in which Ammonius played an active role in bringing about his own torture and death.) Cyril then warned the Jews against any further harm upon the Christians. However, with the support of Orestes (which is in no way implied by Scholasticus), the Jews felt confident in defying Cyril's authority, and so one night ran through the streets proclaiming: "The church of the apostolic Athanasius (Alexander) is on fire: come to its succour, all ye Christians." The Christians responded to the alarms only to be slaughtered by the Jews in a coordinated ambush.

The next morning, all remaining Christians of the town came to Cyril with news of the massacre, after which Cyril marched with them to purge the Jews from Alexandria. In so doing, Cyril allowed the pillaging of their possessions, and soon after purified all the synagogues in the city and made them into Churches (Scholasticus makes no mention of "purifying" the Synagogues). In the expulsion of the Jews, Orestes was unable to offer them any assistance.

Shortly thereafter, a group of Christians, under Peter the magistrate, went looking for Hypatia, the "pagan woman who had beguiled the people of the city and the prefect through her enchantments". They found her sitting in a chair, at which point they seized and brought her to "the great church, named Caesarion", where they proceeded to rip the clothes off her body. Then they dragged her through the streets of Alexandria until she died and burned her remains. Nikiu's description of Hypatia's death also differs from that of Scholasticus. Following the death of Hypatia, Bishop Cyril was named "the new Theophilus". With the death of Hypatia, Nikiu writes, the Christians had expelled the last remnant of pagan idolatry.
Comparison of the two accounts
Socrates Scholasticus (born after 380 AD, died after 439 AD) 		John of Nikiû (7th century) 		

Yet even she fell a victim to the political jealousy which at that time prevailed. For as she had frequent interviews with Orestes, it was calumniously reported among the Christian populace that it was she who prevented Orestes from being reconciled to the bishop. Some of them, therefore, hurried away by a fierce and bigoted zeal, whose ringleader was a reader named Peter, waylaid her returning home and, dragging her from her carriage, they took her to the church called Caesareum, where they completely stripped her, and then murdered her with tiles. After tearing her body in pieces, they took her mangled limbs to a place called Cinaron, and there burnt them.[31]
		

And, in those days, there appeared in Alexandria a female philosopher, a pagan named Hypatia, and she was devoted at all times to magic, astrolabes, and instruments of music, and she beguiled many people through Satanic wiles . . . A multitude of believers in God arose under the guidance of Peter the Magistrate . . . and they proceeded to seek for the pagan woman who had beguiled the people of the city and the Prefect through her enchantments. And when they learnt the place where she was, they proceeded to her and found her . . . they dragged her along till they brought her to the great church, named Caesareum. Now this was in the days of the fast. And they tore off her clothing and dragged her . . . through the streets of the city till she died. And they carried her to a place named Cinaron, and they burned her body with fire.[16]
Works

No written work widely recognized by scholars as Hypatia's own has survived to the present time. Many of the works commonly attributed to her are believed to have been collaborative works with her father, Theon Alexandricus. This kind of authorial uncertainty is typical for female philosophers in antiquity.[32]

A partial list of Hypatia's works as mentioned by other antique and medieval authors or as posited by modern authors:

    A commentary on the 13-volume Arithmetica by Diophantus.[14]
    A commentary on the Conics of Apollonius.[14]
    Edited the existing version of Ptolemy's Almagest.[33]
    Edited her father's commentary on Euclid's Elements.[34]
    She wrote a text "The Astronomical Canon".[14] (Either a new edition of Ptolemy's Handy Tables or commentary on the aforementioned Almagest.)[35][36][37]

Her contributions to science are reputed to include the invention of the hydrometer,[38] used to determine the relative density (or specific gravity) of liquids. However, the hydrometer was invented before Hypatia, and already known in her time.[39][40]

Her student Synesius, bishop of Cyrene, wrote a letter describing his construction of an astrolabe.[41] Earlier astrolabes predate that of Synesius by at least a century,[42][43] and Hypatia's father had gained fame for his treatise on the subject.[44] However, Synesius claimed that his was an improved model.[45] Synesius also sent Hypatia a letter describing a hydrometer, and requesting her to have one constructed for him.[46]
Legacy
Late Antiquity to the Age of Reason
"Hypatia", at the Haymarket Theatre, January 1893

Shortly after her murder, there appeared under Hypatia's name a forged anti-Christian letter.[47] The Neoplatonist historian Damascius (c. 458 – c. 538) was "anxious to exploit the scandal of Hypatia's death", and attributed responsibility for her murder to Bishop Cyril and his Christian followers; that historical account is contained in the Suda.[48] Damascius's account of the Christian murder of Hypatia is the sole historical source attributing direct responsibility to Bishop Cyril.[49] Maria Dzielska proposes that the bishop's body guards might have murdered Hypatia.[50]

Some writers have theorized that the origin of the story of Saint Catherine was based on Hypatia.[51]

The intellectual Eudokia Makrembolitissa (1021–1096), the second wife of Byzantine Emperor Constantine X Doukas, was described by the historian Nicephorus Gregoras as a "second Hypatia".[52]

Centuries later, the early 18th-century deist scholar John Toland used the murder of Hypatia as the basis for the anti-Catholic tract Hypatia: Or the History of a most beautiful, most vertuous, most learned, and every way accomplish'd Lady; who was torn to pieces by the Clergy of Alexandria, to gratify the pride, emulation, and cruelty of their Archbishop, commonly, but undeservedly, stil'd St. Cyril.[53]

In turn, the Christians defended themselves from Toland with The History of Hypatia, a most Impudent School-Mistress of Alexandria: Murder'd and torn to Pieces by the Populace, in Defence of Saint Cyril and the Alexandrian Clergy from the Aspersions of Mr. Toland, by Thomas Lewis, in 1721.[54]
19th century
Hypatia, by Charles William Mitchell (1885), believed to be based on Charles Kingsley's 1853 novel where she is described as an erotic heroine.
Cameron's 1867 photograph Hypatia

In the 19th century, interest in the "literary legend of Hypatia" began to rise.[55] Diodata Saluzzo Roero's 1827 Ipazia ovvero delle Filosofie suggested that Cyril had actually converted Hypatia to Christianity, and that she had been killed by a "treacherous" priest.

In 1843, German authors Soldan and Heppe argued in their highly influential History of the Witchcraft Trials that Hypatia may have been, in effect, the first famous "witch" punished under Christian authority (see Witch-hunt).[56]

In his 1847 Hypatie and 1857 Hypatie et Cyrille, French poet Charles-Marie-René Leconte de Lisle portrayed Hypatia as the epitome of "vulnerable truth and beauty".[57]

Charles Kingsley's 1853 novel Hypatia – or New Foes with an Old Face, which portrayed the scholar as a "helpless, pretentious, and erotic heroine",[58] recounted her conversion by a Jewish-Christian named Raphael Aben-Ezra after supposedly becoming disillusioned with Orestes.

In 1867, the early photographer Julia Margaret Cameron created a portrait of the scholar as a young woman.[59] On 2 January 1893, a stage play "Hypatia", written by G. Stuart Ogilvie, opened at the Haymarket Theatre in London. It was based on the novel by Charles Kingsley, and was produced by Herbert Beerbohm Tree. The title role was initially played by Julia Neilson, and it featured an elaborate musical score written by the composer Hubert Parry.[60][61]
20th century
An actress, possibly Mary Anderson, in the title role of the play Hypatia, circa 1900.

Some authors mention her in passing, such as Marcel Proust, who dropped her name in the last sentence of "Madame Swann at Home", the first section of Within a Budding Grove.

Some characters are named after her, such as Hypatia Cade, a precocious child and main character in the science fiction novel The Ship Who Searched by Mercedes Lackey and Anne McCaffrey.

Rinne Groff's 2000 play The Five Hysterical Girls Theorem features a character named Hypatia who lives silently, in fear that she will suffer the fate of her namesake.

Hypatia is the name of a 'shipmind' (ship computer) in The Boy Who Would Live Forever, a novel in Frederik Pohl's Heechee series.

Umberto Eco's novel Baudolino sees the protagonist meet a secluded society of satyr-like creatures who all take their name and philosophy from Hypatia.

A fictional version of the historic character appears in several works and indeed series, such as

    The Heirs of Alexandria series written by Mercedes Lackey, Eric Flint and Dave Freer, is an alternate history in which Hypatia was converted to Christianity by John Chrysostom, which saved her life and enabled her to stop the mob from destroying the Library of Alexandria, eventually resulting in her elevation to Sainthood. The books, taking place in the world of 1530 resulting from the above, include copies from the alternate Hypatia's influential correspondence with Chrysostom and St. Augustine, as well as a monastic order, the Hypatian Siblings.
    The Corto Maltese adventure Fable of Venice, by characteristic superposition of anachronistic elements, sees Hypatia preside over an intellectual salon in pre-Fascist Italy;
    As a recurring character in Mark London Williams's juvenile fiction Danger Boy.

She also appears, briefly, as one of the kidnapped scientists and philosophers in the Doctor Who serial Time and the Rani.

American astronomer Carl Sagan, in Cosmos: A Personal Voyage, gave a detailed speculative description of Hypatia's death, linking it with the destruction of the Library of Alexandria.

A more scholarly historical study of her, Hypatia of Alexandria by Maria Dzielska (translated into English by F. Lyra, published by Harvard University Press), was named by Choice Magazine as an "Outstanding Academic Book of 1995, Philosophy Category".

She has been claimed by second wave feminism, most prominently as Hypatia: A Journal of Feminist Philosophy, published since 1986 by Indiana University Press.

Judy Chicago's large-scale The Dinner Party awards her a place-setting.[62]

A central character in Iain Pears's The Dream of Scipio is a woman philosopher clearly modeled on (though not identical with) Hypatia.[63]

The last two centuries have seen Hypatia's name honored in the sciences, especially astronomy. 238 Hypatia, a main belt asteroid discovered in 1884, was named for her. The lunar crater Hypatia was named for her, in addition to craters named for her father Theon and for Cyril. The 180 km Rimae Hypatia are located north of the crater, one degree south of the equator, along the Mare Tranquillitatis.[64]

By the end of the 20th, century Hypatia's name was applied to projects ranging in scope from an Adobe typeface (Hypatia Sans Pro),[65] to a cooperative community house in Madison, Wisconsin. A genus of moth also bears her name.
21st century

Her life continues to be fictionalized by authors in many countries and languages. Two recent examples are Ipazia, scienziata alessandrina by Adriano Petta (translated from the Italian in 2004 as Hypatia: Scientist of Alexandria), and Hypatia y la eternidad (Hypatia and Eternity) by Ramon Galí, a fanciful alternate history, in Spanish (2009).[66]

Azazil,[67] by Egyptian Muslim author Dr. Youssef Ziedan, tells the story of the religious conflict of that time through the eyes of a monk, including a substantial section on Hypatia;[68] Ziedan's[69] book has been criticized by Christians in Egypt.[70]

Her life is portrayed in the Malayalam novel Francis Itty Cora (2009) by T. D Ramakrishnan.

Examples in English include

    Remembering Hypatia: A Novel of Ancient Egypt by Brian Trent,;[71]
    Flow Down Like Silver, Hypatia of Alexandria (2009) by Ki Longfellow, the second in a trilogy of the divine feminine, the first being The Secret Magdalene;[72]
    The Plot to Save Socrates (2006) by Paul Levinson and his sequel Unburning Alexandria (novelette, 2008; novel 2013) – where Hypatia turns out to have been a time-traveler from 21st century America.[73][74][75]
    Heresy: the Life of Pelagius (2012) by David Lovejoy, which includes Hypatia's death as well as a portrait of Synesius[76]

More factually, Hypatia of Alexandria: Mathematician and Martyr (2007) is a brief (113 page) biography by Michael Deakin, with a focus on her mathematical research. Hypatia has been considered a universal genius.[77]

The 2009 movie Agora, directed by Alejandro Amenábar, focuses on Hypatia's final years. Hypatia, portrayed by actress Rachel Weisz, is seen investigating the heliocentric model of the solar system proposed by Aristarchus of Samos, and even anticipating the elliptical orbits discovered by Johannes Kepler 1200 years later.

The 2014 version of Cosmos portrays Hypatia in a similar vein as the 1980 version.
Notes

Colavito,A. & Petta,A. (April 2004), Hypatia: Scientist of Alexandria. Milan, Italy: Lightning Print Ltd. (ISBN 9788848804202).
"Hypatia (Random House & Collins dictionaries)". Dictionary.com.
http://www-history.mcs.st-and.ac.uk/Biographies/Hypatia.html
Scholasticus, Socrates. Ecclesiastical History.
Krebs, Groundbreaking Scientific Experiments, Inventions, and Discoveries; The Cambridge Dictionary of Philosophy, 2nd edition, Cambridge University Press, 1999: "Greek Neoplatonist philosopher who lived and taught in Alexandria."
Mueller, I.; L.S. Grinstein & P.J. Campbell (1987). Women of Mathematics: A Biobibliographic Sourcebook. New York: Greenwood Press.
Columbia Encyclopedia, Hypatia citation:Alexandrian Neoplatonic philosopher and mathematician
Hypatia, Encyclopædia Britannica: "Egyptian Neoplatonist philosopher who was the first notable woman in mathematics."
Edward Jay Watts, (2006), City and School in Late Antique Athens and Alexandria. "Hypatia and pagan philosophical culture in the later fourth century", pages 197–198. University of California Press
Michael Deakin (August 3, 1997). "Ockham's Razor: Hypatia of Alexandria". ABC Radio. Retrieved July 10, 2014.
Multicultural Resource Center: Hypatia
Dzielska 1995, p. 66
Historical Dictionary of Feminism, by Janet K. Boles, Diane Long Hoeveler. p. 166.
Suda online, Upsilon 166
Bregman, J. (1982). "Synesius of Cyrene: Philosopher-bishop". Berkeley: University of California Press.
Chronicle 84.87–103
John, Bishop of Nikiu, Chronicle 84.87–103
A. Fitzgerald, Letters of Synesius of Cyrene, London, 1926. (Letter 154 of Synesius of Cyrene to Hypatia).
Dzielska 1995, p. 28
"Isidorus 1" entry in John Robert Martindale, (1980), The Prosopography of the Later Roman Empire. Cambridge University Press
Kingsley, Charles. "Hypatia" preface agreeing with Gibbon quotation.
Great Inspirations – Hypatia
"Women Philosophers in the Ancient Greek World: Donning the Mantle", by Kathleen Wider. Hypatia © 1986 Indiana University Press p. 49–50; Mangasarian, Mangasar Mugurditch. The Martyrdom of Hypatia, 1915
Greenblatt, The Swerve: how the world became modern 2011:93.
Christian Wildberg, in Hypatia of Alexandria – a philosophical martyr, The Philosopher's Zone, ABC Radio National (4 April 2009); Dzielska 1995, p. 105
John, Bishop of Nikiu: Chronicle. London (1916). English Translation.
Socrates Scholasticus (born after 380 AD, died after 439 AD), Ecclesiastical History.
Socrates Scholasticus: "believing that respect for religion would induce him to lay aside his resentment."
Ὀστράκοις, ostrakois, is the DAT pl. form of ὄστρακον, ostrakon. See ὄστρακον. Liddell, Henry George; Scott, Robert; A Greek–English Lexicon at the Perseus Project.
John of Nikiu, "Chronicle", c. 700 AD
Ecclesiastical History, Bk VII: Chap. 15 (miscited as VI:15).
David Engels: Zwischen Philosophie und Religion: Weibliche Intellektuelle in Spätantike und Islam, in: D. Groß (Hg.), Gender schafft Wissen, Wissenschaft Gender. Geschlechtsspezifische Unterscheidungen Rollenzuschreibungen im Wandel der Zeit, Kassel 2009, 97–124.
Dzielska 1995, pp. 71–2; "Until recently scholars thought that Hypatia revised Theon's commentary on Almagest. The view was based on the title of the commentary on the third book of Almagest, which read: "Commentary by Theon of Alexandria on Book III of Ptolemy's Almagest, edition revised by my daughter Hypatia, the philosopher." Cameron, who analyzed Theon's titles for other books of Almagest and for other scholarly texts of late antiquity, concludes that Hypatia corrected not her father's commentary but the text of Almagest itself. Thus, the extant text of Almagest could have been prepared, at least partly, by Hypatia".
Grout, J. (n.d.). "Encyclopaedia Romana: Hypatia". Retrieved 2009-05-16.
Dzielska 1995, p. 72
"Hypatia and Her Mathematics". American Mathematical Monthly 101 (3): 234–243. March 1994.
http://www.cosmographica.com/cosmo20130812/alexandria/hypatia.html
Ethlie Ann Vare and Greg Ptacek, Mothers of Invention 1988, pp. 24–26.
'For the sake of completeness we must mention that fact that SYNESIOS in his letter to HYPATIA mentions a hydrometer, which according to some was already known in the fourth century AD to PRISCIANUS, that is a century before SYNESIOS and HYPATIA.', Forbes, 'A Short History of the Art of Distillation: from the beginnings up to the death of Cellier Blumenthal', p. 25 (1970).
'In 402, Hypatia receives a letter from the ailing Synesius giving a brief description of what he calls a hydroscope. This is a scientific instrument then in common use, although Hypatia is often credited with its invention.', Waithe, 'Ancient women philosophers, 600 B.C.-500 A.D.', p. 192 (1987).
'In his letters he describes a hydroscope (really a hydrometer) he has made as well as a catapult. In addition to that, he had constructed what the ancients called an astrolabe, an instrument that demonstrated celestial phenomena. Cicero describes one invented by Archimedes; Hipparchus had made another; two first century A.D. models were commemorated in the Greek Anthology;', Thomas, 'Paths from Ancient Greece', p. 69 (1988).
'It is generally accepted that Greek astrologers, in either the 1st or 2nd centuries BC, invented the astrolabe', Krebs, 'Groundbreaking Scientific Experiments, Inventions, and Discoveries of the Middle Ages and the Renaissance', p. 196 (2004).
'The invention of the astrolabe is usually attributed to Hipparchus of the second century BC. But there is no firm evidence to support this view. It is however certain that the instrument was well known to the Greeks before the beginning of the Christian era.', Sarma, 'The Archaic and the Exotic: studies in the history of Indian astronomical instruments', p. 241 (2008).
Chris Marvin, Frank Sikernitsky The Window:Philosophy on the Web
'Claudius Ptolemy used astrolabes also, but Synesius says that his new one is an improved model based on later research.', Thomas, 'Paths from Ancient Greece', p. 69 (1988).
"Ep. 15 is rather short, but gives interesting information: it contains a detailed description of a hydroscope, which Synesius asks Hypatia to order for him in Alexandria, requesting that she herself oversee its construction." Kari Vogt, "The Hierophant of Philosophy" – Hypatia of Alexandria, Kari Elisabeth Boerresen and Kari Vogt, Women's studies of the Christian and Islamic traditions: ancient, medieval, and Renaissance foremothers, p. 161 (1993).
Synodicon, c. 216, in iv. tom. Concil. p. 484, as detailed in The History of the Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire, vol. 8, chapter XLVII
Whitfield 1995, p.14
Dzielska 1996, p. 18
Dzielska 1995, p. 99
Christine Walsh, The Cult of St Katherine of Alexandria in Early Medieval Europe, 2007, p. 10
Dzielska 1995 p. 67
Ogilvie, M. B. (1986). Women in science: Antiquity through the 19th century. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
The History Of Hypatia, A most Impudent School-Mistress of Alexandria: Murder'd and torn to Pieces by the Populace, In Defence of Saint Cyril and the Alexandrian Clergy. From the Aspersions of Mr. Toland.
Dzielska 1995, p. 3
Soldan, W.G. and Heppe, H., Geschichte der Hexenprozesse, Essen reprint 1990. p.82.
Edwards, Catharine. "Roman Presences: Receptions of Rome in European Culture, 1789–1945" pp. 112.
Snyder, J.M. (1989). The woman and the lyre: Women writers in classical Greece and Rome. Carbondale, IL: Southern Illinois University Press.
Marsh, Jan; Pamela Gerrish Nunn (1998). Pre-Raphaelite Women Artists. London: Thames & Hudson.
Walter Macqueen-Pope, (1948), Haymarket: theatre of perfection, p. 337. Allen
William Archer, (1969), The theatrical 'world' for 1893, p. 9. B. Blom.
Snyder, Carol (1980–1981), "Reading the Language of "The Dinner Party"", Woman's Art Journal 1 (2): 30–34, JSTOR 1358081, "Among the raised images distributed on the first two wings of the table are two with broken edges—the Hypatia and Petronilla da Meath plates. Chicago confirmed my reading of the broken edge as a reference to the violent deaths both women suffered"".
Evenepol, Willy (September 2010), "Sidonius Apollinaris en Synesius van Cyrene in de roman The Dream of Scipio", Lampas (in Dutch) 43 (3): 269–283. See in particular p. 275.
"Hypatia of Alexandria: A woman before her time". The Woman Astronomer. November 11, 2007. Retrieved 2007-12-03.
"Hypatia Sans Pro, my new typeface". Adobe Systems. Retrieved 2008-08-24.
Hypatia y la eternidad Gali, Ramón ISBN 978-84-936773-9-8
page:78-80
Rose al-Yusuf, May 9, 2008 reviewed by Arab-West Report, 2008, week 18, art. 48
http://www.ziedan.com/English/index_o.asp
"The sin of apostasy in 'Azazīl'". Arab-West Report; 2008, Week 28, Art. 29. Archived from the original on 2011-07-21. Retrieved 2014-03-08.
"Remembering Hypatia: A Novel of Ancient Egypt".
"Flow Down Like Silver, Hypatia of Alexandria".
Levinson, Paul (November 2008). "Unburning Alexandria". Analog Science Fiction and Fact (Dell Magazines). Retrieved 26 March 2013.
Clark, Brian Charles (2006). "The Plot to Save Socrates – book review". Curled Up With A Good Book. Retrieved 26 March 2013.
"Inteview with Paul Levinson, Author of Unburning Alexandria". The Morton Report. 2013. Retrieved 3 November 2013.
Heresy: the Life of Pelagius by David Lovejoy, Echo Publications

    MacDonald, Beverley and Weldon, Andrew. (2003). Written in Blood: A Brief History of Civilization (pg. 173). Allen & Unwin.

References

    Dzielska, Maria (1996) [1995]. Hypatia of Alexandria. trans. F. Lyra. Harvard University Press. ISBN 0-674-43776-4.
    edited by David Fideler (1994) [1993]. Fideler, David, ed. Alexandria 2: The Journal of Western Cosmological Traditions II. Phanes Press. ISBN 0-933999-97-6.
    Whitfield, Bryan J. (Summer 1995). "The Beauty of Reasoning: A Reexamination of Hypatia and Alexandria". The Mathematics Educator (University of Georgia) 6 (1): 14–21. Retrieved 2009-05-16.

 This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain: Smith, William, ed. (1870). "Hypatia". Dictionary of Greek and Roman Biography and Mythology.
Further reading

    Alic[e?], Margaret (1986). Hypatia's Heritage: A History of Women in Science from Antiquity through the Nineteenth Century. Boston: Beacon Press. ISBN 0-8070-6731-8.
    Deakin, Michael A.B. (1994), "Hypatia and Her Mathematics", American Mathematical Monthly, Vol. 101 (3), pp. 234–243.
    Kingsley, Charles (1853). Hypatia, or New Foes with Old Faces. Chicago: W.B. Conkley.
    Knorr, Richard (1989). Textual Studies in Ancient and Medieval Geometry. Boston: Birkhäuser. ISBN 0-8176-3387-1.
    Molinaro, Ursule (1990). "A Christian Martyr in Reverse: Hypatia". A Full Moon of Women. New York: Dutton. ISBN 0-525-24848-X.
    Osen, Lynn M. (1990). Women in Mathematics. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. ISBN 0-262-15014-X.
    Parsons, Reuben (1892), "St. Cyril of Alexandria and the Murder of Hypatia" in Some Lies and Errors of History, Notre Dame, IND.: Office of the "Ave Maria", pp. 44–53.
    Richeson, A. W. (1940), "Hypatia of Alexandria", National Mathematics Magazine, Vol. XV, No. 2, pp. 74–82.
    Schaefer, Francis (1902), "St. Cyril of Alexandria and the Murder of Hypatia", The Catholic University Bulletin 8, pp. 441–453.
    Teruel, Pedro Jesús (2011). Filosofía y Ciencia en Hipatia (in Spanish). Madrid: Gredos. ISBN 978-84-249-1939-9.
    Cain, Kathleen (1986), "Hypatia, the Alexandrian Library, and M.L.S. (Martyr-Librarian Syndrome)", Community & Junior College Libraries, Vol. 4(3) (Spring 1986), pp. 35–39.

External links
	Wikimedia Commons has media related to Hypatia.
	Wikisource has original works written by or about:
Hypatia

    International Society for Neoplatonic Studies
    Hypatia, Alexandria's Great Female Scholar: from Smithsonian magazine
    HYPATIA, THE DAUGHTER OF THEON paper by Giovanni Costa
    Socrates Scholasticus, Ecclesiastical History, VII.15, at the Internet Archive
    (Greek) (Latin) Socrates Scholasticus, Ecclesiastical History, VII.15 (pp. 760–761), at the Documenta Catholica Omnia

[show]

    v
    t
    e

Platonists
[show]

    v
    t
    e

Ancient Greek mathematics
Categories:

    Hellenistic Egyptians
    Egyptian people of Greek descent
    4th-century births
    415 deaths
    4th-century Romans
    5th-century Byzantine people
    5th-century mathematicians
    4th-century women writers
    5th-century women writers
    5th-century philosophers
    Ancient Greek mathematicians
    Ancient Greek women philosophers
    Ancient Greek women writers
    Greek torture victims
    Executed philosophers
    Hellenism and Christianity
    Women inventors
    Roman-era librarians of Alexandria
    Late-Roman-era students in Athens
    Neoplatonists
    People executed by flaying
    Persecution by early Christians
    Roman-era philosophers
    Women mathematicians
    Women in technology
    Ancient Greek philosophers
    Byzantine Egypt
    Persecution of pagans
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	William Shakespeare
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
  (Redirected from Shakespeare)
This article is about the poet and playwright. For other persons of the same name, see William Shakespeare (disambiguation). For other uses of "Shakespeare", see Shakespeare (disambiguation).
Page semi-protected
William Shakespeare
Shakespeare.jpg
The Chandos portrait, artist and authenticity unconfirmed. National Portrait Gallery, London.
Born 	Baptised 26 April 1564 (birth date unknown)
Stratford-upon-Avon, Warwickshire, England
Died 	23 April 1616 (aged 52)
Stratford-upon-Avon, Warwickshire, England
Occupation 	Playwright, poet, actor
Period 	English Renaissance
Spouse 	Anne Hathaway (m. 1582–1616)
Children 	

    Susanna Hall
    Hamnet Shakespeare
    Judith Quiney

Relatives 	

    John Shakespeare (father)
    Mary Shakespeare (mother)

Signature 	

William Shakespeare (/ˈʃeɪkspɪər/;[1] 26 April 1564 (baptised) – 23 April 1616)[nb 1] was an English poet, playwright, and actor, widely regarded as the greatest writer in the English language and the world's pre-eminent dramatist.[2] He is often called England's national poet and the "Bard of Avon".[3][nb 2] His extant works, including some collaborations, consist of about 38 plays,[nb 3] 154 sonnets, two long narrative poems, and a few other verses, of which the authorship of some is uncertain. His plays have been translated into every major living language and are performed more often than those of any other playwright.[4]

Shakespeare was born and brought up in Stratford-upon-Avon. At the age of 18, he married Anne Hathaway, with whom he had three children: Susanna, and twins Hamnet and Judith. Between 1585 and 1592, he began a successful career in London as an actor, writer, and part-owner of a playing company called the Lord Chamberlain's Men, later known as the King's Men. He appears to have retired to Stratford around 1613 at age 49, where he died three years later. Few records of Shakespeare's private life survive, and there has been considerable speculation about such matters as his physical appearance, sexuality, religious beliefs, and whether the works attributed to him were written by others.[5]

Shakespeare produced most of his known work between 1589 and 1613.[6][nb 4] His early plays were mainly comedies and histories and these works remain regarded as some of the best work produced in these genres. He then wrote mainly tragedies until about 1608, including Hamlet, Othello, King Lear, and Macbeth, considered some of the finest works in the English language. In his last phase, he wrote tragicomedies, also known as romances, and collaborated with other playwrights.

Many of his plays were published in editions of varying quality and accuracy during his lifetime. In 1623, John Heminges and Henry Condell, two friends and fellow actors of Shakespeare, published the First Folio, a collected edition of his dramatic works that included all but two of the plays now recognised as Shakespeare's. It was prefaced with a poem by Ben Jonson, in which Shakespeare is hailed, presciently, as "not of an age, but for all time".[7] In the 20th and 21st century, his work has been repeatedly adopted and rediscovered by new movements in scholarship and performance. His plays remain highly popular today and are constantly studied, performed, and reinterpreted in diverse cultural and political contexts throughout the world.

Contents

    1 Life
        1.1 Early life
        1.2 London and theatrical career
        1.3 Later years and death
    2 Plays
        2.1 Performances
        2.2 Textual sources
    3 Poems
        3.1 Sonnets
    4 Style
    5 Influence
    6 Critical reputation
    7 Speculation about Shakespeare
        7.1 Authorship
        7.2 Religion
        7.3 Sexuality
        7.4 Portraiture
    8 List of works
        8.1 Classification of the plays
    9 See also
    10 Notes
        10.1 Footnotes
        10.2 Citations
    11 References
    12 External links

Life
Main article: Shakespeare's life
Early life

William Shakespeare was the son of John Shakespeare, an alderman and a successful glover originally from Snitterfield, and Mary Arden, the daughter of an affluent landowning farmer.[8] He was born in Stratford-upon-Avon and baptised there on 26 April 1564. His actual date of birth remains unknown, but is traditionally observed on 23 April, Saint George's Day.[9] This date, which can be traced back to an 18th-century scholar's mistake, has proved appealing to biographers, since Shakespeare died 23 April 1616.[10] He was the third child of eight and the eldest surviving son.[11]

Although no attendance records for the period survive, most biographers agree that Shakespeare was probably educated at the King's New School in Stratford,[12] a free school chartered in 1553,[13] about a quarter-mile (400 m) from his home. Grammar schools varied in quality during the Elizabethan era, but grammar school curricula were largely similar, the basic Latin text was standardised by royal decree,[14] and the school would have provided an intensive education in grammar based upon Latin classical authors.[15]
John Shakespeare's house, believed to be Shakespeare's birthplace, in Stratford-upon-Avon.

At the age of 18, Shakespeare married the 26-year-old Anne Hathaway. The consistory court of the Diocese of Worcester issued a marriage licence on 27 November 1582. The next day, two of Hathaway's neighbours posted bonds guaranteeing that no lawful claims impeded the marriage.[16] The ceremony may have been arranged in some haste, since the Worcester chancellor allowed the marriage banns to be read once instead of the usual three times,[17] and six months after the marriage Anne gave birth to a daughter, Susanna, baptised 26 May 1583.[18] Twins, son Hamnet and daughter Judith, followed almost two years later and were baptised 2 February 1585.[19] Hamnet died of unknown causes at the age of 11 and was buried 11 August 1596.[20]
Shakespeare's coat of arms, featuring a spear as a pun on the family name.

After the birth of the twins, Shakespeare left few historical traces until he is mentioned as part of the London theatre scene in 1592. The exception is the appearance of his name in the 'complaints bill' of a law case before the Queen's Bench court at Westminster dated Michaelmas Term 1588 and 9 October 1589.[21] Scholars refer to the years between 1585 and 1592 as Shakespeare's "lost years".[22] Biographers attempting to account for this period have reported many apocryphal stories. Nicholas Rowe, Shakespeare's first biographer, recounted a Stratford legend that Shakespeare fled the town for London to escape prosecution for deer poaching in the estate of local squire Thomas Lucy. Shakespeare is also supposed to have taken his revenge on Lucy by writing a scurrilous ballad about him.[23] Another 18th-century story has Shakespeare starting his theatrical career minding the horses of theatre patrons in London.[24] John Aubrey reported that Shakespeare had been a country schoolmaster.[25] Some 20th-century scholars have suggested that Shakespeare may have been employed as a schoolmaster by Alexander Hoghton of Lancashire, a Catholic landowner who named a certain "William Shakeshafte" in his will.[26] Little evidence substantiates such stories other than hearsay collected after his death, and Shakeshafte was a common name in the Lancashire area.[27]
London and theatrical career

"All the world's a stage,
and all the men and women merely players:
they have their exits and their entrances;
and one man in his time plays many parts..."
—As You Like It, Act II, Scene 7, 139–42[28]

It is not known exactly when Shakespeare began writing, but contemporary allusions and records of performances show that several of his plays were on the London stage by 1592.[29] By then, he was sufficiently well known in London to be attacked in print by the playwright Robert Greene in his Groats-Worth of Wit:

    ...there is an upstart Crow, beautified with our feathers, that with his Tiger's heart wrapped in a Player's hide, supposes he is as well able to bombast out a blank verse as the best of you: and being an absolute Johannes factotum, is in his own conceit the only Shake-scene in a country.[30]

Scholars differ on the exact meaning of these words,[31] but most agree that Greene is accusing Shakespeare of reaching above his rank in trying to match university-educated writers such as Christopher Marlowe, Thomas Nashe and Greene himself (the "university wits").[32] The italicised phrase parodying the line "Oh, tiger's heart wrapped in a woman's hide" from Shakespeare's Henry VI, Part 3, along with the pun "Shake-scene", identifies Shakespeare as Greene's target. Here Johannes Factotum—"Jack of all trades"— means a second-rate tinkerer with the work of others, rather than the more common "universal genius".[31][33]

Greene's attack is the earliest surviving mention of Shakespeare's career in the theatre. Biographers suggest that his career may have begun any time from the mid-1580s to just before Greene's remarks.[34] From 1594, Shakespeare's plays were performed by only the Lord Chamberlain's Men, a company owned by a group of players, including Shakespeare, that soon became the leading playing company in London.[35] After the death of Queen Elizabeth in 1603, the company was awarded a royal patent by the new king, James I, and changed its name to the King's Men.[36]

In 1599, a partnership of company members built their own theatre on the south bank of the River Thames, which they called the Globe. In 1608, the partnership also took over the Blackfriars indoor theatre. Records of Shakespeare's property purchases and investments indicate that the company made him a wealthy man.[37] In 1597, he bought the second-largest house in Stratford, New Place, and in 1605, he invested in a share of the parish tithes in Stratford.[38]

Some of Shakespeare's plays were published in quarto editions from 1594. By 1598, his name had become a selling point and began to appear on the title pages.[39] Shakespeare continued to act in his own and other plays after his success as a playwright. The 1616 edition of Ben Jonson's Works names him on the cast lists for Every Man in His Humour (1598) and Sejanus His Fall (1603).[40] The absence of his name from the 1605 cast list for Jonson's Volpone is taken by some scholars as a sign that his acting career was nearing its end.[41] The First Folio of 1623, however, lists Shakespeare as one of "the Principal Actors in all these Plays", some of which were first staged after Volpone, although we cannot know for certain which roles he played.[42] In 1610, John Davies of Hereford wrote that "good Will" played "kingly" roles.[43] In 1709, Rowe passed down a tradition that Shakespeare played the ghost of Hamlet's father.[44] Later traditions maintain that he also played Adam in As You Like It and the Chorus in Henry V,[45] though scholars doubt the sources of the information.[46]

Shakespeare divided his time between London and Stratford during his career. In 1596, the year before he bought New Place as his family home in Stratford, Shakespeare was living in the parish of St. Helen's, Bishopsgate, north of the River Thames.[47][48] He moved across the river to Southwark by 1599, the year his company constructed the Globe Theatre there.[47][49] By 1604, he had moved north of the river again, to an area north of St Paul's Cathedral with many fine houses. There he rented rooms from a French Huguenot named Christopher Mountjoy, a maker of ladies' wigs and other headgear.[50]
Later years and death

Rowe was the first biographer to record the tradition, repeated by Johnson, that Shakespeare retired to Stratford 'some years before his death'.[51][52] He was still working as an actor in London in 1608; in an answer to the sharers' petition in 1635 Cuthbert Burbage stated that after purchasing the lease of the Blackfriars Theatre in 1608 from Henry Evans, the King's Men 'placed men players' there, 'which were Heminges, Condell, Shakespeare, etc.'.[53] However it is perhaps relevant that the bubonic plague raged in London throughout 1609.[54][55] The London public playhouses were repeatedly closed during extended outbreaks of the plague (a total of over 60 months closure between May 1603 and February 1610),[56] which meant there was often no acting work. Retirement from all work was uncommon at that time.[57] Shakespeare continued to visit London during the years 1611–1614.[51] In 1612, he was called as a witness in Bellott v. Mountjoy, a court case concerning the marriage settlement of Mountjoy's daughter, Mary.[58] In March 1613 he bought a gatehouse in the former Blackfriars priory;[59] and from November 1614 he was in London for several weeks with his son-in-law, John Hall.[60] After 1610, Shakespeare wrote fewer plays, and none are attributed to him after 1613.[61] His last three plays were collaborations, probably with John Fletcher,[62] who succeeded him as the house playwright for the King's Men.[63]
Shakespeare's funerary monument in Stratford-upon-Avon.

Shakespeare died on 23 April 1616, at the age of 52.[64] He died within a month of signing his will, a document which he begins by describing himself as being in "perfect health". There is no extant contemporary source that explains how or why he died. After half a century had passed, John Ward, the vicar of Stratford, wrote in his notebook: "Shakespeare, Drayton and Ben Jonson had a merry meeting and, it seems, drank too hard, for Shakespeare died of a fever there contracted."[65][66] This is not impossible, for Shakespeare knew Jonson and Drayton. Of the tributes that started to come from fellow authors, one refers to his relatively early death: "We wondered, Shakespeare, that thou went'st so soon/From the world's stage to the grave's tiring room."[67]

He was survived by his wife and two daughters. Susanna had married a physician, John Hall, in 1607,[68] and Judith had married Thomas Quiney, a vintner, two months before Shakespeare's death.[69] Shakespeare signed his last will and testament on 25 March 1616; the following day his new son-in-law, Thomas Quiney was found guilty of fathering an illegitimate son by Margaret Wheeler, who had died during childbirth. Thomas was ordered by the church court to do public penance which would have caused much shame and embarrassment for the Shakespeare family.[70]

In his will, Shakespeare left the bulk of his large estate to his elder daughter Susanna.[71] The terms instructed that she pass it down intact to "the first son of her body".[72] The Quineys had three children, all of whom died without marrying.[73] The Halls had one child, Elizabeth, who married twice but died without children in 1670, ending Shakespeare's direct line.[74] Shakespeare's will scarcely mentions his wife, Anne, who was probably entitled to one third of his estate automatically.[75] He did make a point, however, of leaving her "my second best bed", a bequest that has led to much speculation.[76] Some scholars see the bequest as an insult to Anne, whereas others believe that the second-best bed would have been the matrimonial bed and therefore rich in significance.[77]

Shakespeare was buried in the chancel of the Holy Trinity Church two days after his death.[78] The epitaph carved into the stone slab covering his grave includes a curse against moving his bones, which was carefully avoided during restoration of the church in 2008:[79]
Shakespeare's grave, sitting next to Anne Shakespeare, his wife, and to Thomas Nash, the husband of his granddaughter.

Good frend for Iesvs sake forbeare,
To digg the dvst encloased heare.
Bleste be Middle English the.svg man Middle English that.svg spares thes stones,
And cvrst be he Middle English that.svg moves my bones.[80][nb 5]

(Modern spelling: Good friend, for Jesus' sake forbear, | To dig the dust enclosed here. | Blessed be the man that spares these stones, | And cursed be he that moves my bones.)

Sometime before 1623, a funerary monument was erected in his memory on the north wall, with a half-effigy of him in the act of writing. Its plaque compares him to Nestor, Socrates, and Virgil.[81] In 1623, in conjunction with the publication of the First Folio, the Droeshout engraving was published.[82]

Shakespeare has been commemorated in many statues and memorials around the world, including funeral monuments in Southwark Cathedral and Poets' Corner in Westminster Abbey.
Plays
Procession of Characters from Shakespeare's Plays by an unknown artist
Main articles: Shakespeare's plays and William Shakespeare's collaborations

Most playwrights of the period typically collaborated with others at some point, and critics agree that Shakespeare did the same, mostly early and late in his career.[83] Some attributions, such as Titus Andronicus and the early history plays, remain controversial, while The Two Noble Kinsmen and the lost Cardenio have well-attested contemporary documentation. Textual evidence also supports the view that several of the plays were revised by other writers after their original composition.

The first recorded works of Shakespeare are Richard III and the three parts of Henry VI, written in the early 1590s during a vogue for historical drama. Shakespeare's plays are difficult to date, however,[84] and studies of the texts suggest that Titus Andronicus, The Comedy of Errors, The Taming of the Shrew and The Two Gentlemen of Verona may also belong to Shakespeare's earliest period.[85] His first histories, which draw heavily on the 1587 edition of Raphael Holinshed's Chronicles of England, Scotland, and Ireland,[86] dramatise the destructive results of weak or corrupt rule and have been interpreted as a justification for the origins of the Tudor dynasty.[87] The early plays were influenced by the works of other Elizabethan dramatists, especially Thomas Kyd and Christopher Marlowe, by the traditions of medieval drama, and by the plays of Seneca.[88] The Comedy of Errors was also based on classical models, but no source for The Taming of the Shrew has been found, though it is related to a separate play of the same name and may have derived from a folk story.[89] Like The Two Gentlemen of Verona, in which two friends appear to approve of rape,[90] the Shrew's story of the taming of a woman's independent spirit by a man sometimes troubles modern critics and directors.[91]
Oberon, Titania and Puck with Fairies Dancing. By William Blake, c. 1786. Tate Britain.

Shakespeare's early classical and Italianate comedies, containing tight double plots and precise comic sequences, give way in the mid-1590s to the romantic atmosphere of his most acclaimed comedies.[92] A Midsummer Night's Dream is a witty mixture of romance, fairy magic, and comic lowlife scenes.[93] Shakespeare's next comedy, the equally romantic Merchant of Venice, contains a portrayal of the vengeful Jewish moneylender Shylock, which reflects Elizabethan views but may appear derogatory to modern audiences.[94] The wit and wordplay of Much Ado About Nothing,[95] the charming rural setting of As You Like It, and the lively merrymaking of Twelfth Night complete Shakespeare's sequence of great comedies.[96] After the lyrical Richard II, written almost entirely in verse, Shakespeare introduced prose comedy into the histories of the late 1590s, Henry IV, parts 1 and 2, and Henry V. His characters become more complex and tender as he switches deftly between comic and serious scenes, prose and poetry, and achieves the narrative variety of his mature work.[97] This period begins and ends with two tragedies: Romeo and Juliet, the famous romantic tragedy of sexually charged adolescence, love, and death;[98] and Julius Caesar—based on Sir Thomas North's 1579 translation of Plutarch's Parallel Lives—which introduced a new kind of drama.[99] According to Shakespearean scholar James Shapiro, in Julius Caesar "the various strands of politics, character, inwardness, contemporary events, even Shakespeare's own reflections on the act of writing, began to infuse each other".[100]
Hamlet, Horatio, Marcellus, and the Ghost of Hamlet's Father. Henry Fuseli, 1780–5. Kunsthaus Zürich.

In the early 17th century, Shakespeare wrote the so-called "problem plays" Measure for Measure, Troilus and Cressida, and All's Well That Ends Well and a number of his best known tragedies.[101] Many critics believe that Shakespeare's greatest tragedies represent the peak of his art. The titular hero of one of Shakespeare's most famous tragedies, Hamlet, has probably been discussed more than any other Shakespearean character, especially for his famous soliloquy which begins "To be or not to be; that is the question".[102] Unlike the introverted Hamlet, whose fatal flaw is hesitation, the heroes of the tragedies that followed, Othello and King Lear, are undone by hasty errors of judgement.[103] The plots of Shakespeare's tragedies often hinge on such fatal errors or flaws, which overturn order and destroy the hero and those he loves.[104] In Othello, the villain Iago stokes Othello's sexual jealousy to the point where he murders the innocent wife who loves him.[105] In King Lear, the old king commits the tragic error of giving up his powers, initiating the events which lead to the torture and blinding of the Earl of Gloucester and the murder of Lear's youngest daughter Cordelia. According to the critic Frank Kermode, "the play-offers neither its good characters nor its audience any relief from its cruelty".[106] In Macbeth, the shortest and most compressed of Shakespeare's tragedies,[107] uncontrollable ambition incites Macbeth and his wife, Lady Macbeth, to murder the rightful king and usurp the throne, until their own guilt destroys them in turn.[108] In this play, Shakespeare adds a supernatural element to the tragic structure. His last major tragedies, Antony and Cleopatra and Coriolanus, contain some of Shakespeare's finest poetry and were considered his most successful tragedies by the poet and critic T. S. Eliot.[109]

In his final period, Shakespeare turned to romance or tragicomedy and completed three more major plays: Cymbeline, The Winter's Tale and The Tempest, as well as the collaboration, Pericles, Prince of Tyre. Less bleak than the tragedies, these four plays are graver in tone than the comedies of the 1590s, but they end with reconciliation and the forgiveness of potentially tragic errors.[110] Some commentators have seen this change in mood as evidence of a more serene view of life on Shakespeare's part, but it may merely reflect the theatrical fashion of the day.[111] Shakespeare collaborated on two further surviving plays, Henry VIII and The Two Noble Kinsmen, probably with John Fletcher.[112]
Performances
Main article: Shakespeare in performance

It is not clear for which companies Shakespeare wrote his early plays. The title page of the 1594 edition of Titus Andronicus reveals that the play had been acted by three different troupes.[113] After the plagues of 1592–3, Shakespeare's plays were performed by his own company at The Theatre and the Curtain in Shoreditch, north of the Thames.[114] Londoners flocked there to see the first part of Henry IV, Leonard Digges recording, "Let but Falstaff come, Hal, Poins, the rest...and you scarce shall have a room".[115] When the company found themselves in dispute with their landlord, they pulled The Theatre down and used the timbers to construct the Globe Theatre, the first playhouse built by actors for actors, on the south bank of the Thames at Southwark.[116] The Globe opened in autumn 1599, with Julius Caesar one of the first plays staged. Most of Shakespeare's greatest post-1599 plays were written for the Globe, including Hamlet, Othello and King Lear.[117]
The reconstructed Globe Theatre, London.

After the Lord Chamberlain's Men were renamed the King's Men in 1603, they entered a special relationship with the new King James. Although the performance records are patchy, the King's Men performed seven of Shakespeare's plays at court between 1 November 1604 and 31 October 1605, including two performances of The Merchant of Venice.[118] After 1608, they performed at the indoor Blackfriars Theatre during the winter and the Globe during the summer.[119] The indoor setting, combined with the Jacobean fashion for lavishly staged masques, allowed Shakespeare to introduce more elaborate stage devices. In Cymbeline, for example, Jupiter descends "in thunder and lightning, sitting upon an eagle: he throws a thunderbolt. The ghosts fall on their knees."[120]

The actors in Shakespeare's company included the famous Richard Burbage, William Kempe, Henry Condell and John Heminges. Burbage played the leading role in the first performances of many of Shakespeare's plays, including Richard III, Hamlet, Othello, and King Lear.[121] The popular comic actor Will Kempe played the servant Peter in Romeo and Juliet and Dogberry in Much Ado About Nothing, among other characters.[122] He was replaced around 1600 by Robert Armin, who played roles such as Touchstone in As You Like It and the fool in King Lear.[123] In 1613, Sir Henry Wotton recorded that Henry VIII "was set forth with many extraordinary circumstances of pomp and ceremony".[124] On 29 June, however, a cannon set fire to the thatch of the Globe and burned the theatre to the ground, an event which pinpoints the date of a Shakespeare play with rare precision.[124]
Textual sources
Title page of the First Folio, 1623. Copper engraving of Shakespeare by Martin Droeshout.

In 1623, John Heminges and Henry Condell, two of Shakespeare's friends from the King's Men, published the First Folio, a collected edition of Shakespeare's plays. It contained 36 texts, including 18 printed for the first time.[125] Many of the plays had already appeared in quarto versions—flimsy books made from sheets of paper folded twice to make four leaves.[126] No evidence suggests that Shakespeare approved these editions, which the First Folio describes as "stol'n and surreptitious copies".[127] Alfred Pollard termed some of them "bad quartos" because of their adapted, paraphrased or garbled texts, which may in places have been reconstructed from memory.[128] Where several versions of a play survive, each differs from the other. The differences may stem from copying or printing errors, from notes by actors or audience members, or from Shakespeare's own papers.[129] In some cases, for example Hamlet, Troilus and Cressida and Othello, Shakespeare could have revised the texts between the quarto and folio editions. In the case of King Lear, however, while most modern editions do conflate them, the 1623 folio version is so different from the 1608 quarto, that the Oxford Shakespeare prints them both, arguing that they cannot be conflated without confusion.[130]
Poems

In 1593 and 1594, when the theatres were closed because of plague, Shakespeare published two narrative poems on erotic themes, Venus and Adonis and The Rape of Lucrece. He dedicated them to Henry Wriothesley, Earl of Southampton. In Venus and Adonis, an innocent Adonis rejects the sexual advances of Venus; while in The Rape of Lucrece, the virtuous wife Lucrece is raped by the lustful Tarquin.[131] Influenced by Ovid's Metamorphoses,[132] the poems show the guilt and moral confusion that result from uncontrolled lust.[133] Both proved popular and were often reprinted during Shakespeare's lifetime. A third narrative poem, A Lover's Complaint, in which a young woman laments her seduction by a persuasive suitor, was printed in the first edition of the Sonnets in 1609. Most scholars now accept that Shakespeare wrote A Lover's Complaint. Critics consider that its fine qualities are marred by leaden effects.[134] The Phoenix and the Turtle, printed in Robert Chester's 1601 Love's Martyr, mourns the deaths of the legendary phoenix and his lover, the faithful turtle dove. In 1599, two early drafts of sonnets 138 and 144 appeared in The Passionate Pilgrim, published under Shakespeare's name but without his permission.[135]
Sonnets
Main article: Shakespeare's sonnets
Title page from 1609 edition of Shake-Speares Sonnets.

Published in 1609, the Sonnets were the last of Shakespeare's non-dramatic works to be printed. Scholars are not certain when each of the 154 sonnets was composed, but evidence suggests that Shakespeare wrote sonnets throughout his career for a private readership.[136] Even before the two unauthorised sonnets appeared in The Passionate Pilgrim in 1599, Francis Meres had referred in 1598 to Shakespeare's "sugred Sonnets among his private friends".[137] Few analysts believe that the published collection follows Shakespeare's intended sequence.[138] He seems to have planned two contrasting series: one about uncontrollable lust for a married woman of dark complexion (the "dark lady"), and one about conflicted love for a fair young man (the "fair youth"). It remains unclear if these figures represent real individuals, or if the authorial "I" who addresses them represents Shakespeare himself, though Wordsworth believed that with the sonnets "Shakespeare unlocked his heart".[139]

"Shall I compare thee to a summer's day?
Thou art more lovely and more temperate..."
—Lines from Shakespeare's Sonnet 18.[140]

The 1609 edition was dedicated to a "Mr. W.H.", credited as "the only begetter" of the poems. It is not known whether this was written by Shakespeare himself or by the publisher, Thomas Thorpe, whose initials appear at the foot of the dedication page; nor is it known who Mr. W.H. was, despite numerous theories, or whether Shakespeare even authorised the publication.[141] Critics praise the Sonnets as a profound meditation on the nature of love, sexual passion, procreation, death, and time.[142]
Style
Main article: Shakespeare's style

Shakespeare's first plays were written in the conventional style of the day. He wrote them in a stylised language that does not always spring naturally from the needs of the characters or the drama.[143] The poetry depends on extended, sometimes elaborate metaphors and conceits, and the language is often rhetorical—written for actors to declaim rather than speak. The grand speeches in Titus Andronicus, in the view of some critics, often hold up the action, for example; and the verse in The Two Gentlemen of Verona has been described as stilted.[144]

Soon, however, Shakespeare began to adapt the traditional styles to his own purposes. The opening soliloquy of Richard III has its roots in the self-declaration of Vice in medieval drama. At the same time, Richard's vivid self-awareness looks forward to the soliloquies of Shakespeare's mature plays.[145] No single play marks a change from the traditional to the freer style. Shakespeare combined the two throughout his career, with Romeo and Juliet perhaps the best example of the mixing of the styles.[146] By the time of Romeo and Juliet, Richard II, and A Midsummer Night's Dream in the mid-1590s, Shakespeare had begun to write a more natural poetry. He increasingly tuned his metaphors and images to the needs of the drama itself.
Pity by William Blake, 1795, Tate Britain, is an illustration of two similes in Macbeth:
"And pity, like a naked new-born babe,
Striding the blast, or heaven's cherubim, hors'd
Upon the sightless couriers of the air."[147]

Shakespeare's standard poetic form was blank verse, composed in iambic pentameter. In practice, this meant that his verse was usually unrhymed and consisted of ten syllables to a line, spoken with a stress on every second syllable. The blank verse of his early plays is quite different from that of his later ones. It is often beautiful, but its sentences tend to start, pause, and finish at the end of lines, with the risk of monotony.[148] Once Shakespeare mastered traditional blank verse, he began to interrupt and vary its flow. This technique releases the new power and flexibility of the poetry in plays such as Julius Caesar and Hamlet. Shakespeare uses it, for example, to convey the turmoil in Hamlet's mind:[149]

    Sir, in my heart there was a kind of fighting
    That would not let me sleep. Methought I lay
    Worse than the mutines in the bilboes. Rashly—
    And prais'd be rashness for it—let us know
    Our indiscretion sometimes serves us well...

    Hamlet, Act 5, Scene 2, 4–8[149]

After Hamlet, Shakespeare varied his poetic style further, particularly in the more emotional passages of the late tragedies. The literary critic A. C. Bradley described this style as "more concentrated, rapid, varied, and, in construction, less regular, not seldom twisted or elliptical".[150] In the last phase of his career, Shakespeare adopted many techniques to achieve these effects. These included run-on lines, irregular pauses and stops, and extreme variations in sentence structure and length.[151] In Macbeth, for example, the language darts from one unrelated metaphor or simile to another: "was the hope drunk/ Wherein you dressed yourself?" (1.7.35–38); "...pity, like a naked new-born babe/ Striding the blast, or heaven's cherubim, hors'd/ Upon the sightless couriers of the air..." (1.7.21–25). The listener is challenged to complete the sense.[151] The late romances, with their shifts in time and surprising turns of plot, inspired a last poetic style in which long and short sentences are set against one another, clauses are piled up, subject and object are reversed, and words are omitted, creating an effect of spontaneity.[152]

Shakespeare combined poetic genius with a practical sense of the theatre.[153] Like all playwrights of the time, he dramatised stories from sources such as Plutarch and Holinshed.[154] He reshaped each plot to create several centres of interest and to show as many sides of a narrative to the audience as possible. This strength of design ensures that a Shakespeare play can survive translation, cutting and wide interpretation without loss to its core drama.[155] As Shakespeare's mastery grew, he gave his characters clearer and more varied motivations and distinctive patterns of speech. He preserved aspects of his earlier style in the later plays, however. In Shakespeare's late romances, he deliberately returned to a more artificial style, which emphasised the illusion of theatre.[156]
Influence
Main article: Shakespeare's influence
Macbeth Consulting the Vision of the Armed Head. By Henry Fuseli, 1793–94. Folger Shakespeare Library, Washington.

Shakespeare's work has made a lasting impression on later theatre and literature. In particular, he expanded the dramatic potential of characterisation, plot, language, and genre.[157] Until Romeo and Juliet, for example, romance had not been viewed as a worthy topic for tragedy.[158] Soliloquies had been used mainly to convey information about characters or events; but Shakespeare used them to explore characters' minds.[159] His work heavily influenced later poetry. The Romantic poets attempted to revive Shakespearean verse drama, though with little success. Critic George Steiner described all English verse dramas from Coleridge to Tennyson as "feeble variations on Shakespearean themes."[160]

Shakespeare influenced novelists such as Thomas Hardy, William Faulkner, and Charles Dickens. The American novelist Herman Melville's soliloquies owe much to Shakespeare; his Captain Ahab in Moby-Dick is a classic tragic hero, inspired by King Lear.[161] Scholars have identified 20,000 pieces of music linked to Shakespeare's works. These include two operas by Giuseppe Verdi, Otello and Falstaff, whose critical standing compares with that of the source plays.[162] Shakespeare has also inspired many painters, including the Romantics and the Pre-Raphaelites. The Swiss Romantic artist Henry Fuseli, a friend of William Blake, even translated Macbeth into German.[163] The psychoanalyst Sigmund Freud drew on Shakespearean psychology, in particular that of Hamlet, for his theories of human nature.[164]

In Shakespeare's day, English grammar, spelling and pronunciation were less standardised than they are now,[165] and his use of language helped shape modern English.[166] Samuel Johnson quoted him more often than any other author in his A Dictionary of the English Language, the first serious work of its type.[167] Expressions such as "with bated breath" (Merchant of Venice) and "a foregone conclusion" (Othello) have found their way into everyday English speech.[168]
Critical reputation
Main articles: Shakespeare's reputation and Timeline of Shakespeare criticism

"He was not of an age, but for all time."
—Ben Jonson[169]

Shakespeare was not revered in his lifetime, but he received a large amount of praise.[170] In 1598, the cleric and author Francis Meres singled him out from a group of English writers as "the most excellent" in both comedy and tragedy.[171] The authors of the Parnassus plays at St John's College, Cambridge numbered him with Chaucer, Gower and Spenser.[172] In the First Folio, Ben Jonson called Shakespeare the "Soul of the age, the applause, delight, the wonder of our stage", though he had remarked elsewhere that "Shakespeare wanted art".
A recently garlanded statue of William Shakespeare in Lincoln Park, Chicago, typical of many created in the 19th and early 20th century.

Between the Restoration of the monarchy in 1660 and the end of the 17th century, classical ideas were in vogue. As a result, critics of the time mostly rated Shakespeare below John Fletcher and Ben Jonson.[173] Thomas Rymer, for example, condemned Shakespeare for mixing the comic with the tragic. Nevertheless, poet and critic John Dryden rated Shakespeare highly, saying of Jonson, "I admire him, but I love Shakespeare".[174] For several decades, Rymer's view held sway; but during the 18th century, critics began to respond to Shakespeare on his own terms and acclaim what they termed his natural genius. A series of scholarly editions of his work, notably those of Samuel Johnson in 1765 and Edmond Malone in 1790, added to his growing reputation.[175] By 1800, he was firmly enshrined as the national poet.[176] In the 18th and 19th centuries, his reputation also spread abroad. Among those who championed him were the writers Voltaire, Goethe, Stendhal and Victor Hugo.[177]

During the Romantic era, Shakespeare was praised by the poet and literary philosopher Samuel Taylor Coleridge; and the critic August Wilhelm Schlegel translated his plays in the spirit of German Romanticism.[178] In the 19th century, critical admiration for Shakespeare's genius often bordered on adulation.[179] "That King Shakespeare," the essayist Thomas Carlyle wrote in 1840, "does not he shine, in crowned sovereignty, over us all, as the noblest, gentlest, yet strongest of rallying signs; indestructible".[180] The Victorians produced his plays as lavish spectacles on a grand scale.[181] The playwright and critic George Bernard Shaw mocked the cult of Shakespeare worship as "bardolatry", claiming that the new naturalism of Ibsen's plays had made Shakespeare obsolete.[182]

The modernist revolution in the arts during the early 20th century, far from discarding Shakespeare, eagerly enlisted his work in the service of the avant-garde. The Expressionists in Germany and the Futurists in Moscow mounted productions of his plays. Marxist playwright and director Bertolt Brecht devised an epic theatre under the influence of Shakespeare. The poet and critic T.S. Eliot argued against Shaw that Shakespeare's "primitiveness" in fact made him truly modern.[183] Eliot, along with G. Wilson Knight and the school of New Criticism, led a movement towards a closer reading of Shakespeare's imagery. In the 1950s, a wave of new critical approaches replaced modernism and paved the way for "post-modern" studies of Shakespeare.[184] By the 1980s, Shakespeare studies were open to movements such as structuralism, feminism, New Historicism, African-American studies, and queer studies.[185][186] In a comprehensive reading of Shakespeare's works and comparing Shakespeare literary accomplishments to accomplishments among leading figures in philosophy and theology as well, Harold Bloom has commented that, "Shakespeare was larger than Plato and than St. Augustine. He encloses us, because we see with his fundamental perceptions."[187]
Speculation about Shakespeare
Authorship
Main article: Shakespeare authorship question

Around 230 years after Shakespeare's death, doubts began to be expressed about the authorship of the works attributed to him.[188] Proposed alternative candidates include Francis Bacon, Christopher Marlowe, and Edward de Vere, 17th Earl of Oxford.[189] Several "group theories" have also been proposed.[190] Only a small minority of academics believe there is reason to question the traditional attribution,[191] but interest in the subject, particularly the Oxfordian theory of Shakespeare authorship, continues into the 21st century.[192]
Religion
Main article: Shakespeare's religion

Some scholars claim that members of Shakespeare's family were Catholics, at a time when Catholic practice was against the law.[193] Shakespeare's mother, Mary Arden, certainly came from a pious Catholic family. The strongest evidence might be a Catholic statement of faith signed by John Shakespeare, found in 1757 in the rafters of his former house in Henley Street. The document is now lost, however, and scholars differ as to its authenticity.[194] In 1591 the authorities reported that John Shakespeare had missed church "for fear of process for debt", a common Catholic excuse.[195] In 1606 the name of William's daughter Susanna appears on a list of those who failed to attend Easter communion in Stratford.[195] As several scholars have noted, whatever his private views, Shakespeare "conformed to the official state religion", as Park Honan put it.[196][197] Shakespeare's will uses a Protestant formula and he was a confirmed member of the Church of England, where he got married, his children were baptized, and where he was buried. Other authors argue that there is a lack of evidence about Shakespeare's religious beliefs. Scholars find evidence both for and against Shakespeare's Catholicism, Protestantism, or lack of belief in his plays, but the truth may be impossible to prove.[198]
Sexuality
Main article: Sexuality of William Shakespeare

Few details of Shakespeare's sexuality are known. At 18, he married the 26-year-old Anne Hathaway, who was pregnant. Susanna, the first of their three children, was born six months later on 26 May 1583. Over the centuries some readers have posited that Shakespeare's sonnets are autobiographical,[199] and point to them as evidence of his love for a young man. Others read the same passages as the expression of intense friendship rather than sexual love.[200] The 26 so-called "Dark Lady" sonnets, addressed to a married woman, are taken as evidence of heterosexual liaisons.[201]
Portraiture
Main article: Portraits of Shakespeare

No written contemporary description of Shakespeare's physical appearance survives, and no evidence suggests that he ever commissioned a portrait, so the Droeshout engraving, which Ben Jonson approved of as a good likeness,[202] and his Stratford monument provide the best evidence of his appearance. From the 18th century, the desire for authentic Shakespeare portraits fuelled claims that various surviving pictures depicted Shakespeare. That demand also led to the production of several fake portraits, as well as mis-attributions, repaintings and relabelling of portraits of other people.[203]
List of works
Further information: Shakespeare bibliography and Chronology of Shakespeare's plays
Classification of the plays
The Plays of William Shakespeare. By Sir John Gilbert, 1849.

Shakespeare's works include the 36 plays printed in the First Folio of 1623, listed according to their folio classification as comedies, histories and tragedies.[204] Two plays not included in the First Folio, The Two Noble Kinsmen and Pericles, Prince of Tyre, are now accepted as part of the canon, with scholars agreed that Shakespeare made a major contribution to their composition.[205] No Shakespearean poems were included in the First Folio.

In the late 19th century, Edward Dowden classified four of the late comedies as romances, and though many scholars prefer to call them tragicomedies, his term is often used.[206] These plays and the associated Two Noble Kinsmen are marked with an asterisk (*) below. In 1896, Frederick S. Boas coined the term "problem plays" to describe four plays: All's Well That Ends Well, Measure for Measure, Troilus and Cressida and Hamlet.[207] "Dramas as singular in theme and temper cannot be strictly called comedies or tragedies", he wrote. "We may therefore borrow a convenient phrase from the theatre of today and class them together as Shakespeare's problem plays."[208] The term, much debated and sometimes applied to other plays, remains in use, though Hamlet is definitively classed as a tragedy.[209]
See also

    English Renaissance theatre
    World Shakespeare Bibliography

Notes
Footnotes

Dates follow the Julian calendar, used in England throughout Shakespeare's lifespan, but with the start of year adjusted to 1 January (see Old Style and New Style dates). Under the Gregorian calendar, adopted in Catholic countries in 1582, Shakespeare died on 3 May (Schoenbaum 1987, xv).
The "national cult" of Shakespeare, and the "bard" identification, dates from September 1769, when the actor David Garrick organised a week-long carnival at Stratford to mark the town council awarding him the freedom of the town. In addition to presenting the town with a statue of Shakespeare, Garrick composed a doggerel verse, lampooned in the London newspapers, naming the banks of the Avon as the birthplace of the "matchless Bard" (McIntyre 1999, 412–432).
The exact figures are unknown. See Shakespeare's collaborations and Shakespeare Apocrypha for further details.
Individual play dates and precise writing span are unknown. See Chronology of Shakespeare's plays for further details.

    In the scribal abbreviations ye for the (3rd line) and yt for that (3rd and 4th lines) the letter y represents in fact th: see article thorn.

Citations

"Shakespeare" entry in Collins English Dictionary, HarperCollins Publishers, 1998.
Greenblatt 2005, 11; Bevington 2002, 1–3; Wells 1997, 399.
Dobson 1992, 185–186
Craig 2003, 3.
Shapiro 2005, xvii–xviii; Schoenbaum 1991, 41, 66, 397–98, 402, 409; Taylor 1990, 145, 210–23, 261–5
Chambers 1930, Vol. 1: 270–71; Taylor 1987, 109–134.
The Norton Anthology of English Literature: Sixteenth/Early Seventeenth Century, Volume B, 2012, pg. 1168
Schoenbaum 1987, 14–22.
Schoenbaum 1987, 24–6.
Schoenbaum 1987, 24, 296; Honan 1998, 15–16.
Schoenbaum 1987, 23–24.
Schoenbaum 1987, 62–63; Ackroyd 2006, 53; Wells et al. 2005, xv–xvi
Baldwin 1944, 464.
Baldwin 1944, 179-80, 183; Cressy 1975, 28, 29.
Baldwin 1944, 117.
Schoenbaum 1987, 77–78.
Wood 2003, 84; Schoenbaum 1987, 78–79.
Schoenbaum 1987, 93.
Schoenbaum 1987, 94.
Schoenbaum 1987, 224.
Bate 2008, 314.
Schoenbaum 1987, 95.
Schoenbaum 1987, 97–108; Rowe 1709.
Schoenbaum 1987, 144–45.
Schoenbaum 1987, 110–11.
Honigmann 1999, 1; Wells et al. 2005, xvii
Honigmann 1999, 95–117; Wood 2003, 97–109.
Wells et al. 2005, 666
Chambers 1930, Vol. 1: 287, 292
Greenblatt 2005, 213.
Greenblatt 2005, 213; Schoenbaum 1987, 153.
Ackroyd 2006, 176.
Schoenbaum 1987, 151–52
Wells 2006, 28; Schoenbaum 1987, 144–46; Chambers 1930, Vol. 1: 59.
Schoenbaum 1987, 184.
Chambers 1923, 208–209.
Chambers 1930, Vol. 2: 67–71.
Bentley 1961, 36.
Schoenbaum 1987, 188; Kastan 1999, 37; Knutson 2001, 17
Adams 1923, 275
Wells 2006, 28.
Schoenbaum 1987, 200.
Schoenbaum 1987, 200–201.
Rowe 1709.
Ackroyd 2006, 357; Wells et al. 2005, xxii
Schoenbaum 1987, 202–3.
Hales 1904, pp. 401–2.
Honan 1998, 121.
Shapiro 2005, 122.
Honan 1998, 325; Greenblatt 2005, 405.
Ackroyd 2006, 476.
Wood 1806, pp. ix–x, lxxii.
Smith 1964, p. 558.
Ackroyd 2006, p. 477.
Barroll 1991, pp. 179–82.
Bate 2008, 354–355.
Honan 1998, 382–83.
Honan 1998, 326; Ackroyd 2006, 462–464.
Schoenbaum 1987, 272–274.
Honan 1998, 387.
Schoenbaum 1987, 279.
Honan 1998, 375–78.
Schoenbaum 1987, 276.
His age and the date are inscribed in Latin on his funerary monument: AETATIS 53 DIE 23 APR
Schoenbaum, Samuel. Shakespeare's Lives. Oxford University Press. 1991. ISBN 9780198186182. Page 78.
Rowse, A. L. William Shakespeare; A Biography. Harper & Row. 1963. Page 453.
Kinney, Arthur F., editor. The Oxford Handbook of Shakespeare. Oxford University Press. 2012. ISBN 9780199566105. Page 11. Verse by James Mabbe printed in the First Folio.
Schoenbaum 1987, 287.
Schoenbaum 1987, 292, 294.
"William Shakespeare Featured Article". Thegenealogist.co.uk. Retrieved 19 March 2014.
Schoenbaum 1987, 304.
Honan 1998, 395–96.
Chambers 1930, Vol. 2: 8, 11, 104; Schoenbaum 1987, 296.
Chambers 1930, Vol. 2: 7, 9, 13; Schoenbaum 1987, 289, 318–19.
Charles Knight, 1842, in his notes on Twelfth Night, quoted in Schoenbaum 1991, 275.
Ackroyd 2006, 483; Frye 2005, 16; Greenblatt 2005, 145–6.
Schoenbaum 1987, 301–3.
Schoenbaum 1987, 306–07; Wells et al. 2005, xviii
BBC News 2008.
Schoenbaum 1987, 306.
Schoenbaum 1987, 308–10.
Cooper 2006, 48.
Thomson, Peter, "Conventions of Playwriting". in Wells & Orlin 2003, 49.
Frye 2005, 9; Honan 1998, 166.
Schoenbaum 1987, 159–61; Frye 2005, 9.
Dutton & Howard 2003, 147.
Ribner 2005, 154–155.
Frye 2005, 105; Ribner 2005, 67; Cheney 2004, 100.
Honan 1998, 136; Schoenbaum 1987, 166.
Frye 2005, 91; Honan 1998, 116–117; Werner 2001, 96–100.
Friedman 2006, 159.
Ackroyd 2006, 235.
Wood 2003, 161–162.
Wood 2003, 205–206; Honan 1998, 258.
Ackroyd 2006, 359.
Ackroyd 2006, 362–383.
Shapiro 2005, 150; Gibbons 1993, 1; Ackroyd 2006, 356.
Wood 2003, 161; Honan 1998, 206.
Ackroyd 2006, 353, 358; Shapiro 2005, 151–153.
Shapiro 2005, 151.
Bradley 1991, 85; Muir 2005, 12–16.
Bradley 1991, 94.
Bradley 1991, 86.
Bradley 1991, 40, 48.
Bradley 1991, 42, 169, 195; Greenblatt 2005, 304.
Bradley 1991, 226; Ackroyd 2006, 423; Kermode 2004, 141–2.
McDonald 2006, 43–46.
Bradley 1991, 306.
Ackroyd 2006, 444; McDonald 2006, 69–70; Eliot 1934, 59.
Dowden 1881, 57.
Dowden 1881, 60; Frye 2005, 123; McDonald 2006, 15.
Wells et al. 2005, 1247, 1279
Wells et al. 2005, xx
Wells et al. 2005, xxi
Shapiro 2005, 16.
Foakes 1990, 6; Shapiro 2005, 125–31.
Foakes 1990, 6; Nagler 1958, 7; Shapiro 2005, 131–2.
Wells et al. 2005, xxii
Foakes 1990, 33.
Ackroyd 2006, 454; Holland 2000, xli.
Ringler 1997, 127.
Schoenbaum 1987, 210; Chambers 1930, Vol. 1: 341.
Shapiro 2005, 247–9.
Wells et al. 2005, 1247
Wells et al. 2005, xxxvii
Wells et al. 2005, xxxiv
Pollard 1909, xi.
Wells et al. 2005, xxxiv; Pollard 1909, xi; Maguire 1996, 28.
Bowers 1955, 8–10; Wells et al. 2005, xxxiv–xxxv
Wells et al. 2005, 909, 1153
Rowe 2006, 21.
Frye 2005, 288.
Rowe 2006, 3, 21.
Rowe 2006, 1; Jackson 2004, 267–294; Honan 1998, 289.
Rowe 2006, 1; Honan 1998, 289; Schoenbaum 1987, 327.
Wood 2003, 178; Schoenbaum 1987, 180.
Honan 1998, 180.
Schoenbaum 1987, 268.
Honan 1998, 180; Schoenbaum 1987, 180.
Shakespeare 1914.
Schoenbaum 1987, 268–269.
Wood 2003, 177.
Clemen 2005a, 150.
Frye 2005, 105, 177; Clemen 2005b, 29.
Brooke 2004, 69; Bradbrook 2004, 195.
Clemen 2005b, 63.
de Sélincourt 1909, 174
Frye 2005, 185.
Wright 2004, 868.
Bradley 1991, 91.
McDonald 2006, 42–6.
McDonald 2006, 36, 39, 75.
Gibbons 1993, 4.
Gibbons 1993, 1–4.
Gibbons 1993, 1–7, 15.
McDonald 2006, 13; Meagher 2003, 358.
Chambers 1944, 35.
Levenson 2000, 49–50.
Clemen 1987, 179.
Steiner 1996, 145.
Bryant 1998, 82.
Gross, John, "Shakespeare's Influence" in Wells & Orlin 2003, 641–2..
Paraisz 2006, 130.
Bloom, Harold. The Western Canon. New York, Riverhead Books, p.346
Cercignani 1981.
Crystal 2001, 55–65, 74.
Wain 1975, 194.
Johnson 2002, 12; Crystal 2001, 63.
Jonson 1996, 10.
Dominik 1988, 9; Grady 2001b, 267.
Grady 2001b, 265; Greer 1986, 9.
Grady 2001b, 266.
Grady 2001b, 269.
Dryden 1889, 71.
Grady 2001b, 270–27; Levin 1986, 217.
Dobson 1992 Cited by Grady 2001b, 270.
Grady 2001b, 272–274. Grady cites Voltaire's Philosophical Letters (1733); Goethe's Wilhelm Meister's Apprenticeship (1795); Stendhal's two-part pamphlet Racine et Shakespeare (1823–25); and Victor Hugo's prefaces to Cromwell (1827) and William Shakespeare (1864).
Levin 1986, 223.
Sawyer 2003, 113.
Carlyle 1907, 161.
Schoch 2002, 58–59.
Grady 2001b, 276.
Grady 2001a, 22–6.
Grady 2001a, 24.
Grady 2001a, 29.
Drakakis 1985, 16–17, 23–25
Harold Bloom (2006). Shakespeare Through the Ages: King Lear, p. xii.
Shapiro 2010, 77-8.
Gibson 2005, 48, 72, 124.
McMichael & Glenn 1962, p. 56.
Did He or Didn't He? That Is the Question, The New York Times, 22 April 2007
Kathman 2003, 620, 625–626; Love 2002, 194–209; Schoenbaum 1991, 430–40.
Pritchard 1979, 3.
Wood 2003, 75–8; Ackroyd 2006, 22–3.
Wood 2003, 78; Ackroyd 2006, 416; Schoenbaum 1987, 41–2, 286.
Rowse, A. L. (1963). William Shakespeare: A Biography. London: Macmillan. ISBN 0-06-013710-X.
A. L. Rowse, as quoted in The Portsmouth Institute (2013). "Newman and the Intellectual Tradition: Portsmouth Review", Sheed & Ward. p. 127: "He died, as he had lived, a conforming member of the Church of England. His will made that perfectly clear - in facts, puts it beyond dispute, for it uses the Protestant formula."
Wilson 2004, 34; Shapiro 2005, 167.
Lee 1900, 55
Casey 1998; Pequigney 1985; Evans 1996, 132.
Fort 1927, 406–414.
Cooper 2006, 48, 57.
Schoenbaum 1981, 190.
Boyce 1996, 91, 193, 513..
Kathman 2003, 629; Boyce 1996, 91.
Edwards 1958, 1–10; Snyder & Curren-Aquino 2007.
Schanzer 1963, 1–10.
Boas 1896, 345.

    Schanzer 1963, 1; Bloom 1999, 325–380; Berry 2005, 37.

References

    Ackroyd, Peter (2006), Shakespeare: The Biography, London: Vintage, ISBN 978-0-7493-8655-9.
    Adams, Joseph Quincy (1923), A Life of William Shakespeare, Boston: Houghton Mifflin, OCLC 1935264.
    Baldwin, T. W. (1944), William Shakspere's Small Latine & Lesse Greek 1, Urbana, Ill: University of Illinois Press, OCLC 359037.
    Barroll, Leeds (1991), Politics, Plague, and Shakespeare's Theater: The Stuart Years, Ithaca: Cornell University Press, ISBN 0-8014-2479-8.
    Bate, Jonathan (2008), The Soul of the Age, London: Penguin, ISBN 978-0-670-91482-1.
    BBC News (28 May 2008). "Bard's 'cursed' tomb is revamped". British Broadcasting Corporation. Retrieved 23 April 2010.
    Bentley, G. E. (1961), Shakespeare: A Biographical Handbook, New Haven: Yale University Press, ISBN 0-313-25042-1, OCLC 356416.
    Berry, Ralph (2005), Changing Styles in Shakespeare, London: Routledge, ISBN 0-415-35316-5.
    Bertolini, John Anthony (1993), Shaw and Other Playwrights, Pennsylvania: Pennsylvania State University Press, ISBN 0-271-00908-X.
    Bevington, David (2002), Shakespeare, Oxford: Blackwell, ISBN 0-631-22719-9.
    Bloom, Harold (1999), Shakespeare: The Invention of the Human, New York: Riverhead Books, ISBN 1-57322-751-X.
    Boas, F. S. (1896), Shakspere and His Predecessors, New York: Charles Scribner's Sons.
    Bowers, Fredson (1955), On Editing Shakespeare and the Elizabethan Dramatists, Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, OCLC 2993883.
    Boyce, Charles (1996), Dictionary of Shakespeare, Ware, Herts, UK: Wordsworth, ISBN 1-85326-372-9.
    Bradbrook, M. C. (2004), "Shakespeare's Recollection of Marlowe", in Edwards, Philip; Ewbank, Inga-Stina; Hunter, G. K., Shakespeare's Styles: Essays in Honour of Kenneth Muir, Cambridge University Press, pp. 191–204, ISBN 0-521-61694-8.
    Bradley, A. C. (1991), Shakespearean Tragedy: Lectures on Hamlet, Othello, King Lear and Macbeth, London: Penguin, ISBN 0-14-053019-3.
    Brooke, Nicholas (2004), "Language and Speaker in Macbeth", in Edwards, Philip; Ewbank, Inga-Stina; Hunter, G. K., Shakespeare's Styles: Essays in Honour of Kenneth Muir, Cambridge University Press, pp. 67–78, ISBN 0-521-61694-8
    Bryant, John (1998), "Moby Dick as Revolution", in Levine, Robert Steven, The Cambridge Companion to Herman Melville, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, ISBN 0-521-55571-X.
    Carlyle, Thomas (1907), Adams, John Chester, ed., On Heroes, Hero-worship, and the Heroic in History, Boston: Houghton, Mifflin and Company, ISBN 1-4069-4419-X, OCLC 643782.
    Casey, Charles (1998), "Was Shakespeare gay? Sonnet 20 and the politics of pedagogy", College Literature 25 (3), archived from the original on 16 May 2007, retrieved 2 May 2007.
    Cercignani, Fausto (1981), Shakespeare's Works and Elizabethan Pronunciation, Oxford: University Press (Clarendon Press).
    Chambers, E. K. (1923), The Elizabethan Stage 2, Oxford: Clarendon Press, ISBN 0-19-811511-3, OCLC 336379.
    Chambers, E. K. (1944), Shakespearean Gleanings, Oxford: Oxford University Press, ISBN 0-8492-0506-9, OCLC 2364570.
    Chambers, E. K. (1930), William Shakespeare: A Study of Facts and Problems, 2 vols., Oxford: Clarendon Press, ISBN 0-19-811774-4, OCLC 353406.
    Cheney, Patrick Gerard (2004), The Cambridge Companion to Christopher Marlowe, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, ISBN 0-521-52734-1.
    Clemen, Wolfgang (2005a), Shakespeare's Dramatic Art: Collected Essays, New York: Routledge, ISBN 0-415-35278-9.
    Clemen, Wolfgang (2005b), Shakespeare's Imagery, London: Routledge, ISBN 0-415-35280-0.
    Clemen, Wolfgang (1987), Shakespeare's Soliloquies, London: Routledge, ISBN 0-415-35277-0.
    Cooper, Tarnya (2006), Searching for Shakespeare, National Portrait Gallery and Yale Center for British Art: Yale University Press, ISBN 978-0-300-11611-3.
    Craig, Leon Harold (2003), Of Philosophers and Kings: Political Philosophy in Shakespeare's "Macbeth" and "King Lear", Toronto: University of Toronto Press, ISBN 0-8020-8605-5.
    Cressy, David (1975), Education in Tudor and Stuart England, New York: St Martin's Press, ISBN 0-7131-5817-4, OCLC 2148260.
    Crystal, David (2001), The Cambridge Encyclopedia of the English Language, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, ISBN 0-521-40179-8.
    de Sélincourt, Basil (1909), William Blake, London: Duckworth & co.
    Dobson, Michael (1992), The making of the national poet, Oxford, England: Oxford University Press, ISBN 978-0-19-818323-5.
    Dominik, Mark (1988), Shakespeare–Middleton Collaborations, Beaverton, OR: Alioth Press, ISBN 0-945088-01-9.
    Dowden, Edward (1881), Shakspere, New York: Appleton & Co., OCLC 8164385.
    Drakakis, John (1985), Drakakis, John, ed., Alternative Shakespeares, New York: Meuthen, ISBN 0-416-36860-3.
    Dryden, John (1889), Arnold, Thomas, ed., An Essay of Dramatic Poesy, Oxford: Clarendon Press, ISBN 81-7156-323-6, OCLC 7847292.
    Duncan Jones, Katherine, ed. (1997), Shakespeare's Sonnets, London: Thomas Learning, retrieved 26 December 2013
    Dutton, Richard; Howard, Jean (2003), A Companion to Shakespeare's Works: The Histories, Oxford: Blackwell, ISBN 0-631-22633-8.
    Edwards, Phillip (1958), "Shakespeare's Romances: 1900–1957", in Nicoll, Allardyce, Shakespeare Survey 11, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, ISBN 0-521-21500-5, OCLC 15880120.
    Eliot, T. S. (1934), Elizabethan Essays, London: Faber & Faber, ISBN 0-15-629051-0, OCLC 9738219.
    Evans, G. Blakemore (1996), "Commentary", in Shakespeare, William; Evans, G. Blakemore (ed.), The Sonnets, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, ISBN 0-521-22225-7.
    Foakes, R. A. (1990), "Playhouses and Players", in Braunmuller, A.; Hattaway, Michael, The Cambridge Companion to English Renaissance Drama, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, ISBN 0-521-38662-4.
    Fort, J. A. (October 1927), "The Story Contained in the Second Series of Shakespeare's Sonnets", The Review of English Studies 3 (12).
    Friedman, Michael D. (2006), "'I'm not a feminist director but...': Recent Feminist Productions of The Taming of the Shrew", in Nelsen, Paul; Schlueter, June, Acts of Criticism: Performance Matters in Shakespeare and his Contemporaries: Essays in Honor of James P. Lusardi, New Jersey: Fairleigh Dickinson University Press, ISBN 0-8386-4059-1.
    Frye, Roland Mushat (2005), The Art of the Dramatist, London; New York: Routledge, ISBN 0-415-35289-4.
    Gibbons, Brian (1993), Shakespeare and Multiplicity, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, ISBN 0-521-44406-3.
    Gibson, H. N. (2005), The Shakespeare Claimants: A Critical Survey of the Four Principal Theories Concerning the Authorship of the Shakespearean Plays, London: Routledge, ISBN 0-415-35290-8.
    Grady, Hugh (2001a), "Modernity, Modernism and Postmodernism in the Twentieth Century's Shakespeare", in Bristol, Michael; McLuskie, Kathleen, Shakespeare and Modern Theatre: The Performance of Modernity, New York: Routledge, ISBN 0-415-21984-1.
    Grady, Hugh (2001b), "Shakespeare Criticism 1600–1900", in deGrazia, Margreta; Wells, Stanley, The Cambridge Companion to Shakespeare, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, ISBN 0-521-65094-1.
    Greenblatt, Stephen (2005), Will in the World: How Shakespeare Became Shakespeare, London: Pimlico, ISBN 0-7126-0098-1.
    Greer, Germaine (1986), William Shakespeare, Oxford: Oxford University Press, ISBN 0-19-287538-8.
    Hales, John W. (January–June 1904). "London Residences of Shakespeare". The Athenaeum (London: John C. Francis): 401–2. Retrieved 8 December 2013..
    Halliwell-Phillipps, James Orchard (1887), Outlines of the Life of Shakespeare II, London: Longmans Green and Co., retrieved 26 December 2013.
    Holland, Peter (2000), "Introduction", in Shakespeare, William; Holland, Peter (ed.), Cymbeline, London: Penguin, ISBN 0-14-071472-3.
    Honan, Park (1998), Shakespeare: A Life, Oxford: Oxford University Press, ISBN 0-19-811792-2.
    Honigmann, E. A. J. (1999), Shakespeare: The Lost Years (Revised ed.), Manchester: Manchester University Press, ISBN 0-7190-5425-7.
    Jackson, MacDonald P. (2004), "A Lover's Complaint Revisited", in Zimmerman, Susan, Shakespeare Studies, Cranbury, NJ: Associated University Press, ISBN 0-8386-4120-2.
    Johnson, Samuel (2002), Lynch, Jack, ed., Samuel Johnson's Dictionary: Selections from the 1755 Work that Defined the English Language, Delray Beach, FL: Levenger Press, ISBN 1-84354-296-X.
    Jonson, Ben (1996), "To the memory of my beloued, The AVTHOR MR. WILLIAM SHAKESPEARE: AND what he hath left vs", in Shakespeare, William; Hinman, Charlton (ed.); Blayney, The First Folio of Shakespeare (2nd ed.), New York: W. W. Norton & Company, ISBN 0-393-03985-4.
    Kastan, David Scott (1999), Shakespeare After Theory, London: Routledge, ISBN 0-415-90112-X.
    Kathman, David (2003), "The Question of Authorship", in Wells, Stanley; Orlin, Lena Cowen, Shakespeare: an Oxford Guide, Oxford Guides, Oxford University Press, pp. 620–32, ISBN 978-0-19-924522-2
    Kermode, Frank (2004), The Age of Shakespeare, London: Weidenfeld & Nicholson, ISBN 0-297-84881-X.
    Knutson, Roslyn (2001), Playing Companies and Commerce in Shakespeare's Time, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, ISBN 0-521-77242-7.
    Lee, Sidney (1900), Shakespeare's Life and Work, London: Smith Elder & Co..
    Levenson, Jill L. (2000), "Introduction", in Shakespeare, William; Levenson, Jill L. (ed.), Romeo and Juliet, Oxford: Oxford University Press, ISBN 0-19-281496-6.
    Levin, Harry (1986), "Critical Approaches to Shakespeare from 1660 to 1904", in Wells, Stanley, The Cambridge Companion to Shakespeare Studies, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, ISBN 0-521-31841-6.
    Love, Harold (2002), Attributing Authorship: An Introduction, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, ISBN 0-521-78948-6.
    Maguire, Laurie E. (1996), Shakespearean Suspect Texts: The "Bad" Quartos and Their Contexts, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, ISBN 0-521-47364-0.
    McDonald, Russ (2006), Shakespeare's Late Style, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, ISBN 0-521-82068-5.
    McIntyre, Ian (1999), Garrick, Harmondsworth, England: Allen Lane, ISBN 0-7139-9328-6.
    McMichael, George; Glenn, Edgar M. (1962), Shakespeare and his Rivals: A Casebook on the Authorship Controversy, New York: Odyssey Press, OCLC 2113359.
    Meagher, John C. (2003), Pursuing Shakespeare's Dramaturgy: Some Contexts, Resources, and Strategies in his Playmaking, New Jersey: Fairleigh Dickinson University Press, ISBN 0-8386-3993-3.
    Muir, Kenneth (2005), Shakespeare's Tragic Sequence, London: Routledge, ISBN 0-415-35325-4.
    Nagler, A. M. (1958), Shakespeare's Stage, New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, ISBN 0-300-02689-7.
    Paraisz, Júlia (2006), "The Nature of a Romantic Edition", in Holland, Peter, Shakespeare Survey 59, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, ISBN 0-521-86838-6.
    Pequigney, Joseph (1985), Such Is My Love: A Study of Shakespeare's Sonnets, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, ISBN 0-226-65563-6.
    Pollard, Alfred W. (1909), Shakespeare Quartos and Folios: A Study in the Bibliography of Shakespeare's Plays, 1594–1685, London: Methuen, OCLC 46308204.
    Pritchard, Arnold (1979), Catholic Loyalism in Elizabethan England, Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, ISBN 0-8078-1345-1.
    Ribner, Irving (2005), The English History Play in the Age of Shakespeare, London: Routledge, ISBN 0-415-35314-9.
    Ringler, William, Jr. (1997), "Shakespeare and His Actors: Some Remarks on King Lear", in Ogden, James; Scouten, In Lear from Study to Stage: Essays in Criticism, New Jersey: Fairleigh Dickinson University Press, ISBN 0-8386-3690-X.
    Rowe, John (2006), "Introduction", in Shakespeare, William; Rowe, John (ed.), The Poems: Venus and Adonis, The Rape of Lucrece, The Phoenix and the Turtle, The Passionate Pilgrim, A Lover's Complaint, by William Shakespeare (2nd revised ed.), Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, ISBN 0-521-85551-9.
    Rowe, Nicholas (1709), Gray, Terry A., ed., Some Acount of the Life &c. of Mr. William Shakespear, Online at Project Gutenberg (published 1997) .
    Sawyer, Robert (2003), Victorian Appropriations of Shakespeare, New Jersey: Fairleigh Dickinson University Press, ISBN 0-8386-3970-4.
    Schanzer, Ernest (1963), The Problem Plays of Shakespeare, London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, ISBN 0-415-35305-X, OCLC 2378165.
    Schoch, Richard (2002), "Pictorial Shakespeare", in Wells, Stanley; Stanton, Sarah, The Cambridge Companion to Shakespeare on Stage, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, ISBN 0-521-79711-X.
    Schoenbaum, S. (1981), William Shakespeare: Records and Images, Oxford University Press, ISBN 978-0-19-520234-2
    Schoenbaum, Samuel (1991), Shakespeare's Lives, Oxford: Oxford University Press, ISBN 0-19-818618-5.
    Schoenbaum, Samuel (1987), William Shakespeare: A Compact Documentary Life (Revised ed.), Oxford: Oxford University Press, ISBN 0-19-505161-0.
    Shakespeare, William (1914), "Sonnet 18", in Craig, W. J., [http://www.bartleby.com/70/ The Oxford Shakespeare: the Complete Works of William Shakespeare] (Bartleby.com (2000) ed.), Oxford: Oxford University Press, retrieved 22 June 2007.
    Shapiro, James (2005), 1599: A Year in the Life of William Shakespeare, London: Faber and Faber, ISBN 0-571-21480-0.
    Shapiro, James (2010), Contested Will: Who Wrote Shakespeare?, New York: Simon & Schuster, ISBN 9781416541622.
    Smith, Irwin (1964), Shakespeare's Blackfriars Playhouse, New York: New York University Press.
    Snyder, Susan; Curren-Aquino, Deborah (2007), "Introduction", in Shakespeare, William; Snyder, Susan (ed.); Curren-Aquino, Deborah (ed.), The Winter's Tale, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, ISBN 0-521-22158-7.
    Steiner, George (1996), The Death of Tragedy, New Haven: Yale University Press, ISBN 0-300-06916-2.
    Taylor, Gary (1990), Reinventing Shakespeare: A Cultural History from the Restoration to the Present, London: Hogarth Press, ISBN 0-7012-0888-0.
    Taylor, Gary (1987), William Shakespeare: A Textual Companion, Oxford: Oxford University Press, ISBN 0-19-812914-9.
    Wain, John (1975), Samuel Johnson, New York: Viking, ISBN 0-670-61671-0.
    Wells, Stanley; Taylor, Gary; Jowett, John; Montgomery, William, eds. (2005), The Oxford Shakespeare: The Complete Works (2nd ed.), Oxford: Oxford University Press, ISBN 0-19-926717-0.
    Wells, Stanley (1997), Shakespeare: A Life in Drama, New York: W. W. Norton, ISBN 0-393-31562-2.
    Wells, Stanley (2006), Shakespeare & Co, New York: Pantheon, ISBN 0-375-42494-6.
    Wells, Stanley; Orlin, Lena Cowen, eds. (2003), Shakespeare: An Oxford Guide, Oxford: Oxford University Press, ISBN 0-19-924522-3.
    Werner, Sarah (2001), Shakespeare and Feminist Performance, London: Routledge, ISBN 0-415-22729-1.
    Wilson, Richard (2004), Secret Shakespeare: Studies in Theatre, Religion and Resistance, Manchester: Manchester University Press, ISBN 0-7190-7024-4.
    Wood, Manley, ed. (1806), The Plays of William Shakespeare with Notes of Various Commentators I, London: George Kearsley, retrieved 27 December 2013.
    Wood, Michael (2003), Shakespeare, New York: Basic Books, ISBN 0-465-09264-0.
    Wright, George T. (2004), "The Play of Phrase and Line", in McDonald, Russ, Shakespeare: An Anthology of Criticism and Theory, 1945–2000, Oxford: Blackwell, ISBN 0-631-23488-8.

External links
Listen to this article (info/dl)
Menu
0:00


This audio file was created from a revision of the "William Shakespeare" article dated 2008-04-11, and does not reflect subsequent edits to the article. (Audio help)
More spoken articles
Sound-icon.svg

    William Shakespeare on Facebook
    Internet Shakespeare Editions
    Folger Digital Texts
    Open Source Shakespeare complete works, with search engine and concordance
    First Four Folios at Miami University Library, digital collection
    The Shakespeare Quartos Archive
    Shakespeare's Words the online version of the best-selling glossary and language companion
    Shakespeare and Music
    Shakespeare's Will from The National Archives
    Free scores by William Shakespeare in the Choral Public Domain Library (ChoralWiki)
    The Shakespeare Birthplace Trust
    William Shakespeare at the Internet Movie Database
    William Shakespeare at Project Gutenberg

[show]

    v
    t
    e

William Shakespeare
[show] 
Links to related articles
Books
View or order collections of articles 	
Office-book.svg 	William Shakespeare
Portals
Access related topics 	
Shakespeare (oval-cropped).png 	Shakespeare portal
Find out more on Wikipedia's
Sister projects 	
Commons-logo.svg 	Media
from Commons
Wiktionary-logo-en.svg 	Definitions
from Wiktionary
Wikibooks-logo.svg 	Textbooks
from Wikibooks
Wikiquote-logo.svg 	Quotations
from Wikiquote
Wikisource-logo.svg 	Source texts
from Wikisource













N-Gram-Based Text Categorization
William B. Cavnar and John M. Trenkle
Environmental Research Institute of Michigan
P.O. Box 134001
Ann Arbor MI 48113-4001
Abstract
Text categorization is a fundamental task in document
processing, allowing the automated handling
of enormous streams of documents in
electronic form. One difficulty in handling some
classes of documents is the presence of different
kinds of textual errors, such as spelling and
grammatical errors in email, and character recognition
errors in documents that come through
OCR. Text categorization must work reliably on
all input, and thus must tolerate some level of
these kinds of problems.
We describe here an N-gram-based approach
to text categorization that is tolerant of textual
errors. The system is small, fast and robust. This
system worked very well for language classification,
achieving in one test a 99.8% correct classification
rate on Usenet newsgroup articles
written in different languages. The system also
worked reasonably well for classifying articles
from a number of different computer-oriented
newsgroups according to subject, achieving as
high as an 80% correct classification rate. There
are also several obvious directions for improving
the system’s classification performance in those
cases where it did not do as well.
The system is based on calculating and comparing
profiles of N-gram frequencies. First, we
use the system to compute profiles on training set
data that represent the various categories, e.g.,
language samples or newsgroup content samples.
Then the system computes a profile for a
particular document that is to be classified.
Finally, the system computes a distance measure
between the document’s profile and each of the
category profiles. The system selects the category
whose profile has the smallest distance to the
document’s profile. The profiles involved are
quite small, typically 10K bytes for a category
training set, and less than 4K bytes for an individual
document.
Using N-gram frequency profiles provides a
simple and reliable way to categorize documents
in a wide range of classification tasks.
1.0 Introduction
Electronic documents come from a wide variety
of sources. Many are generated with various
word processing software packages, and are subjected
to various kinds of automatic scrutiny,
e.g., spelling checkers, as well as to manual editing
and revision. Many other documents, however,
do not have the benefit of this kind of
scrutiny, and thus may contain significant numbers
of errors of various kinds. Email messages
and bulletin board postings, for example, are
often composed on the fly and sent without even
the most cursory levels of inspection and correction.
Also, paper documents that are digitally
scanned and run through an OCR system will
doubtless contain at least some recognition
errors. It is precisely on these kinds of documents,
where further manual inspection and correction
is difficult and costly, that there would be
the greatest benefit in automatic processing.
One fundamental kind of document processing
is text categorization, in which an incoming
document is assigned to some pre-existing category.
Routing news articles from a newswire is
one application for such a system. Sorting
through digitized paper archives would be
another. These applications have the following
characteristics:
• The categorization must work reliably in
spite of textual errors.
• The categorization must be efficient, consuming
as little storage and processing
time as possible, because of the sheer volume
of documents to be handled.
• The categorization must be able to recognize
when a given document does not
match any category, or when it falls
between two categories. This is because
category boundaries are almost never clearcut.
In this paper we will cover the following topics:
• Section 2.0 introduces N-grams and Ngram-
based similarity measures.
• Section 3.0 discusses text categorization
using N-gram frequency statistics.
• Section 4.0 discusses testing N-grambased
text categorization on a language
classification task.
• Section 5.0 discusses testing N-grambased
text categorization on a computer
newsgroup classification task.
• Section 6.0 discusses some advantages of
N-gram-based text categorization over
other possible approaches.
• Section 7.0 gives some conclusions, and
indicates directions for further work.
2.0 N-Grams
An N-gram is an N-character slice of a longer
string. Although in the literature the term can
include the notion of any co-occurring set of
characters in a string (e.g., an N-gram made up
of the first and third character of a word), in this
paper we use the term for contiguous slices only.
Typically, one slices the string into a set of overlapping
N-grams. In our system, we use N-grams
of several different lengths simultaneously. We
also append blanks to the beginning and ending
of the string in order to help with matching
beginning-of-word and ending-of-word situations.
(We will use the underscore character (“_”)
to represent blanks.) Thus, the word “TEXT”
would be composed of the following N-grams:
bi-grams: _T, TE, EX, XT, T_
tri-grams: _TE, TEX, EXT, XT_, T_ _
quad-grams: _TEX, TEXT, EXT_, XT_ _, T_ _ _
In general, a string of length k, padded with
blanks, will have k+1 bi-grams, k+1tri-grams,
k+1 quad-grams, and so on.
N-gram-based matching has had some success
in dealing with noisy ASCII input in other
problem domains, such as in interpreting postal
addresses ([1] and [2]), in text retrieval ([3] and
[4]), and in a wide variety of other natural language
processing applications[5]. The key benefit
that N-gram-based matching provides derives
from its very nature: since every string is decomposed
into small parts, any errors that are present
tend to affect only a limited number of those
parts, leaving the remainder intact. If we count
N-grams that are common to two strings, we get
a measure of their similarity that is resistant to a
wide variety of textual errors.
3.0 Text Categorization Using NGram
Frequency Statistics
Human languages invariably have some words
which occur more frequently than others. One of
the most common ways of expressing this idea
has become known as Zipf’s Law [6], which we
can re-state as follows:
The nth most common word in a human language
text occurs with a frequency inversely proportional
to n.
The implication of this law is that there is
always a set of words which dominates most of
the other words of the language in terms of frequency
of use. This is true both of words in general,
and of words that are specific to a particular
subject. Furthermore, there is a smooth continuum
of dominance from most frequent to least.
The smooth nature of the frequency curves helps
us in some ways, because it implies that we do
not have to worry too much about specific frequency
thresholds. This same law holds, at least
approximately, for other aspects of human languages.
In particular, it is true for the frequency
of occurrence of N-grams, both as inflection
forms and as morpheme-like word components
which carry meaning. (See Figure 1 for an example
of a Zipfian distribution of N-gram frequencies
from a technical document.) Zipf’s Law
implies that classifying documents with N-gram
frequency statistics will not be very sensitive to
cutting off the distributions at a particular rank. It
also implies that if we are comparing documents
from the same category they should have similar
N-gram frequency distributions.
We have built an experimental text categorization
system that uses this idea. Figure 2 illustrates
the overall data flow for the system. In this
scheme, we start with a set of pre-existing text
categories (such as subject domains) for which
we have reasonably sized samples, say, of 10K to
20K bytes each. From these, we would generate
a set of N-gram frequency profiles to represent
each of the categories. When a new document
arrives for classification, the system first computes
its N-gram frequency profile. It then compares
this profile against the profiles for each of
the categories using an easily calculated distance
measure. The system classifies the document as
belonging to the category having the smallest
distance.
3.1 Generating N-Gram Frequency
Profiles
The bubble in Figure 2 labelled “Generate
Profile” is very simple. It merely reads incoming
text, and counts the occurrences of all N-grams.
To do this, the system performs the following
steps:
• Split the text into separate tokens consisting
only of letters and apostrophes. Digits
and punctuation are discarded. Pad the
token with sufficient blanks before and
after.
• Scan down each token, generating all possible
N-grams, for N=1 to 5. Use positions
that span the padding blanks, as well.
• Hash into a table to find the counter for the
N-gram, and increment it. The hash table
uses a conventional collision handling
mechanism to ensure that each N-gram
gets its own counter.
• When done, output all N-grams and their
counts.
• Sort those counts into reverse order by the
number of occurrences. Keep just the Ngrams
themselves, which are now in
reverse order of frequency.
FIGURE 1. N-Gram Frequencies By Rank In A Technical Document
0
500
1000
1500
2000
N-Gram Frequency
0 100 200 300 400 500
N-Gram Rank
The resulting file is then an N-gram frequency
profile for the document. When we plot
the frequencies in this profile by rank, we get a
Zipfian distribution graph very similar to that in
Figure 2. We can make the following informal
observations from an inspection of a number of
different N-gram frequency profiles for a variety
of different category samples:
• The top 300 or so N-grams are almost
always highly correlated to the language.
That is, a long English passage about compilers
and a long English passage about
poetry would tend to have a great many Ngrams
in common in the top 300 entries of
their respective profiles. On the other hand,
a long passage in French on almost any
topic would have a very different distribution
of the first 300 N-grams.
• The very highest ranking N-grams are
mostly uni-grams (N=1), and simply reflect
the distribution of the letters of the alphabet
in the document’s language. After that
come N-grams that comprise function
words (such as determiners) and very frequent
prefixes and suffixes. There is, of
course, a long tail to the distribution of language-
specific N-grams, and it goes well
past 300.
• Starting around rank 300 or so, an N-gram
frequency profile begins to show N-grams
that are more specific to the subject of the
.
FIGURE 2. Dataflow For N-Gram-Based Text Categorization
Category
Samples
New
Document
Generate
Profile
Generate
Profile
Category
Profiles
Document
Profile
Profile
Distance
Measure
Profile
Distances
Find
Minimum
Distance
Selected
Category
document. These represent terms and
stems that occur very frequently in documents
about the subject.
• There is nothing special about rank 300
itself, since Zipf’s law gives us in fact a
very smooth distribution curve. Rather, we
arrived at this number mostly by inspection.
Doubtless, one could do more elaborate
statistics and choose an optimal cutoff
rank for a particular application.
We should note that these observations apply
mostly to shorter documents, such as those from
newsgroups. If documents were longer, the shift
from language-specific N-grams to subject-specific
N-grams would like occur at a later rank.
3.2 Comparing and Ranking N-Gram
Frequency Profiles
The bubble in Figure 2 labelled “Measure
Profile Distance” is also very simple. It merely
takes two N-gram profiles and calculates a simple
rank-order statistic we call the “out-of-place”
measure. This measure determines how far out of
place an N-gram in one profile is from its place
in the other profile. Figure 3 gives a simple
example of this calculation using a few N-grams.
For each N-gram in the document profile, we
find its counterpart in the category profile, and
then calculate how far out of place it is. For
example, in Figure 3, the N-gram “ING” is at
rank 2 in the document, but at rank 5 in the category.
Thus it is 3 ranks out of place. If an N-gram
(such as “ED” in the figure) is not in the category
profile, it takes some maximum out-of-place
value. The sum of all of the out-of-place values
for all N-grams is the distance measure for the
document from the category. We could also use
other kinds of statistical measures for ranked lists
(such as the Wilcoxin rank sum test). However,
the out-of-place score provides a simple and
intuitive distance measure that seems to work
well enough for these proof-of-concept tests.
Finally, the bubble labelled “Find Minimum
Distance” simply takes the distance measures
from all of the category profiles to the document
profile, and picks the smallest one.
4.0 Testing N-Gram-Based Text
Categorization on Language
Classification
Most writing systems support more than one language.
For example, nearly all of the languages
from the former Soviet Union use the Cyrillic
script. Given a text that uses a particular writing
system, it is necessary to determine the language
in which it is written before further processing is
possible.
There are several broad approaches to the
language classification problem. One obvious
technique is to keep a lexicon for each possible
language, and then to look up every word in the
sample text to see in which lexicon it falls. The
lexicon that contains the most words from the
sample indicates which language was used.
However, building or obtaining representative
lexicons is not necessarily easy, especially
for some of the lesser-used languages. Furthermore,
if the language is highly inflected, that is,
using many different forms for each word to indicate
case, tense or other attributes, then either the
lexicons must become several times larger to get
the necessary word inclusion, or one must
develop some language-specific morphological
processing to reduce different forms to their
stems. Finally, if the text is the result of an OCR
process, there may be recognition errors due to
poor image quality, and these will disrupt the lexicon
lookup process.
Another approach to language classification
involves the use of N-gram analysis. The basic
idea is to identify N-grams whose occurrence in
a document gives strong evidence for or against
identification of a text as belonging to a particular
language. Although this has been done before,
it makes a good test case for our text categorization
method. We can use the N-gram frequency
profile technique to classify documents according
to their language without building a lexicon
or a set of morphological processing rules.
Instead, we need merely obtain modestly sized
sample texts (10K to 20K bytes), calculate the Ngram
frequency profiles, and use those to classify
the documents.
4.1 Language Classification Testing
Procedure
In this test, our N-gram-based text categorization
system very reliably identified the language
of electronic mail messages taken from
some of the Usenet newsgroups. These messages
came in a variety of languages, but were all presented
in standard ASCII, with a few typographical
conventions to handle such things as
diacritical markings. The classification procedure
was as follows:
• Obtained training sets (category samples)
for each language to be classified. Typically,
these training sets were on the order
of 20K to 120K bytes in length. There was
no particular format requirement, but each
training set did not contain samples of any
language other than the one it was supposed
to represent.
• Computed N-gram frequency profiles on
the training sets as described above.
• Computed each article’s N-gram profile as
described above. The resulting profile was
on the order of 4K in length.
• Computed an overall distance measure
between the sample’s profile and the category
profile for each language using the
out-of-place measure, and then picked the
category with the smallest distance.
Such a system has modest computational and
storage requirements, and is very effective. It
requires no semantic or content analysis apart
from the N-gram frequency profile itself.
4.2 Language Classification Test Data
For this test, we collected 3713 language
samples from the soc.culture newsgroup hierarchy
of the Usenet. These newsgroups are devoted
to discussions about topics relevant to particular
countries or cultures. Generally, those discussions
were in the language of the particular country/
culture, although some articles were partly or
wholly in English. Table 1 gives a breakdown of
the number of samples for each group, the supposed
principal language for the group, the number
of non-English articles, the number of
English articles, the number of mixed language
articles, the number of articles that contain junk
(i.e., not a body of recognizable text), and the
number of usable articles (pure English or pure
non-English) for the test.
The sample articles ranged in size from a single
line of text to as much as 50K bytes, with the
FIGURE 3. Calculating The Out-Of-Place Measure Between Two Profiles
TH
ER
ON
LE
ING
AND
TH
ING
ON
ER
AND
ED
... ...
Category
Profile
Document
Profile
Out Of
Place
0
3
0
2
1
no-match = max
sum = distance measure
most frequent
least frequent
Note: These profiles are for explanatory purposes only and do
not reflect real N-gram frequency statistics.
average around 1700 bytes. The sample extraction
program also removed the usual header
information, such as subject and keyword identification,
leaving only the body of the article. This
prevented any matches that were too strongly
influenced by standard header information for
the newsgroup (e.g., the newsgroup name or
other lengthy identification phrases). For each
language, we also assembled from manually
selected and edited newsgroup articles an independent
training set of 20K to 120K bytes in
length. The N-gram frequency files for these
training sets become the language profiles used
by the classification procedure.
We determined the true classification for each
test sample semi-automatically. First, we
assumed that each sample was in fact in the language
corresponding to the dominant language
for the newsgroup it came from. For example, we
would expect that a sample from the france
newsgroup would be in French. This produced a
default classification for each sample. Then we
classified the sample with the procedure outlined
earlier. We compared the resulting classification
to the default one. If there was a discrepancy, that
is, if the classification procedure identified the
sample as being from some language other than
the default, we then manually inspected the sample
and gave it a corrected classification, if necessary.
We also determined by this process
articles which had mixed languages (e.g., interspersed
passages in English and Portuguese) or
junk (no recognizable body of text) and removed
them from the test set. The resulting test set consisted
of 3478 usable articles consisting of reasonably
pure samples of a single language.
4.3 Language Classification Results
We have categorized the results along several
dimensions. First, we kept track of whether the
original article was over or under 300 bytes in
length. Our initial hypothesis was that the system
would have more problems classifying shorter
messages because there would be a smaller
amount of text from which to compute N-gram
frequencies. On the whole, the system was only
slightly sensitive to length. Second, we also varied
the number of the N-gram frequencies available
in the profile for the match, by limiting it to
TABLE 1. Breakdown of Articles From Newsgroups
Newsgroup Language # Art.
Non-
Engl Engl. Mixed Junk Usable
australia English 104 0 104 0 0 104
brazil Portuguese 86 46 10 13 17 56
britain English 514 0 509 0 5 508
canada English 257 0 251 3 3 251
celtic English 347 0 345 0 2 345
france French 294 200 73 17 4 273
germany German 505 73 408 13 11 481
italy Italian 336 293 23 13 7 316
latinamerica Spanish 275 92 133 5 45 225
mexico Spanish 288 197 66 7 18 263
netherlands Dutch 255 184 51 15 5 235
poland Polish 127 92 25 7 3 117
portugual Portuguese 97 68 27 0 2 95
spain Spanish 228 176 33 12 7 209
Totals 3713 1421 2058 105 129 3478
statistics for 100, 200, 300 or 400 N-grams. This
variable did have an impact on match performance,
although by the 400 N-gram level language
classification was almost perfect. Table 2
gives the classification percent correct for each
combination of test variables, while Table 3 gives
the ratio of errors committed to samples processed.
These results show some interesting patterns:
• The classification procedure works a little
better for longer articles, but not quite as
much as we expected.
• For the most part, the classification procedure
works better the longer the category
profile it has to use for matching. However,
there were some interesting anomalies,
indicated by the cells with asterisks on
Table 2. These represent combinations of
test variables that did worse than similar
combinations with shorter profiles. In other
words, for these cases, using more N-gram
frequencies actually decreased classification
performance. Post mortem examination
of the problematic articles showed that
at least part of the difficulty was that, in
spite of the manual truthing efforts to
remove mixed text, some articles still had
passages from two languages. The interfering
passages were mostly in the so-called
signature blocks which are customary at
the end of Usenet articles. In mixed language
situations, this system, which used a
forced choice selection, had no good mechanism
for dealing with two language profiles
with very similar distance measures
from the article. In this case, adding statistics
for more N-grams may then push one
distance measure slightly ahead of the
other in a hard-to-predict fashion.
Overall, the system yielded its best performance
at a profile length of 400 N-grams. At this
Note: Asterisks indicate combinations of test variables that did worse than similar combinations
using shorter profiles.
TABLE 2. Percent Correct Classification
Article Length
 
£ 300
 
£ 300
 
£ 300
 
£ 300
 
> 300
 
> 300
 
> 300
 
> 300
Profile Length 100 200 300 400 100 200 300 400
Newsgroup
australia 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0
brazil 70.0 80.0 90.0 90.0 91.3 91.3 95.6 95.7
britain 96.9 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0
canada 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 *99.6 100.0 100.0
celtic 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 99.7 100.0 100.0 100.0
france 90.0 95.0 100.0 *95.0 99.6 99.6 *99.2 99.6
germany 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 98.9 100.0 100.0 100.0
italy 88.2 100.0 100.0 100.0 91.6 99.3 99.6 100.0
latinamerica 91.3 95.7 *91.3 95.7 97.5 100.0 *99.5 *99.0
mexico 90.6 100.0 100.0 100.0 94.8 99.1 100.0 *99.5
netherlands 92.3 96.2 96.2 96.2 96.2 99.0 100.0 100.0
poland 93.3 93.3 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0
portugual 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 86.8 97.6 100.0 100.0
span 81.5 96.3 100.0 100.0 90.7 98.9 98.9 99.45
Overall 92.9 97.6 98.6 98.3 97.2 99.5 99.8 99.8
level, the system misclassified only 7 articles out
of 3478, yielding an overall classification rate of
99.8%.
5.0 Testing N-Gram-Based Text
Categorization on Subject
Classification
The same text categorization approach easily
extends to the notion of using N-gram frequency
to measure subject similarity for documents that
are in the same language. Indeed, the approach
extends to a multi-language database where both
the language and the content of the document are
of interest in the retrieval process. In order to test
this approach, we used this classification system
to identify the appropriate newsgroup for newsgroup
articles. The articles for this experiment
came from some of the Usenet newsgroups. We
wished to see how accurately the system would
identify which newsgroup each message originally
came from. The classification procedure
was as follows:
• Obtained training sets for each newsgroup.
For this purpose, we used articles known as
frequently-asked-question (FAQ) lists.
Many newsgroups regularly publish such
FAQs as a way of reducing traffic in the
group by answering questions or discussing
issues that come up a lot in the group.
In this sense, then, the FAQ for a newsgroup
tries to define what the newsgroup is
(and is not) about, and as such contains
much of the core terminology for the
group. The FAQs we have collected are
between 18K and 132K in length. There is
no particular format requirement, but the
FAQ should provide adequate coverage for
the subject matter of the newsgroup.
• Computed N-gram frequencies on the
newsgroup’s FAQ. These are exactly the
same as the other kinds of N-gram fre-
TABLE 3. Ratio of Incorrect Classifications To Total Possible Classifications
Article
Length
 
£ 300
 
£ 300
 
£ 300
 
£ 300
 
> 300
 
> 300
 
> 300
 
> 300
Profile
Length 100 200 300 400 100 200 300 400
Newsgroup
australia 0/12 0/12 0/12 0/12 0/92 0/92 0/92 0/92
brazil 3/10 2/10 1/10 1/10 4/46 4/46 2/46 2/46
britain 1/32 0/32 0/32 0/32 0/476 0/476 0/476 0/476
canada 0/19 0/19 0/19 0/19 0/232 1/232 0/232 0/232
celtic 0/18 0/18 0/18 0/18 1/327 0/327 0/327 0/327
france 2/20 1/20 0/20 1/20 1/253 1/253 2/253 1/253
germany 0/32 0/32 0/32 0/32 5/449 0/449 0/449 0/449
italy 2/17 0/17 0/17 0/17 25/299 2/299 1/299 0/299
latinamerica 2/23 1/23 2/23 1/23 5/202 0/202 1/202 2/202
mexico 3/32 0/32 0/32 0/32 12/231 2/231 0/231 1/231
netherlands 2/26 1/26 1/26 1/26 8/209 2/209 0/209 0/209
poland 1/15 1/15 0/15 0/15 0/102 0/102 0/102 0/102
portugual 0/12 0/12 0/12 0/12 11/83 2/83 0/83 0/83
span 5/27 1/27 0/27 0/27 17/182 2/182 2/182 1/182
Overall 21/295 7/295 4/295 4/295 89/3183 16/3183 8/3183 7/3183
quency profiles mentioned earlier. The
resulting profiles are quite small, on the
order of 10K bytes or less.
• Computed an article’s N-gram profile in a
fashion similar to that for computing the
profile for each FAQ. The articles averaged
2K in length and the resulting article profiles
were on the order of 4K in length.
• Computed an overall distance measure
between the article’s profile and the profile
for each newsgroup’s FAQ. The FAQ profile
with the smallest distance measure
from the article’s profile determined which
newsgroup to classify the sample as.
• Compared the selected newsgroup from
the actual one the article came from.
5.1 Subject Classification Test Data
To test this system, we collected article samples
from five Usenet newsgroups. These newsgroups
are shown in Table 4. We chose these five
because they were all subfields of computer science,
and thus would provide an opportunity for
testing how the system might confuse newsgroups
that were somewhat closely related. The
article extraction program also removed the usual
header information such as subject and keyword
identification, leaving only the body of the article.
This prevented any matches that were too
strongly influenced by standard header information
for the newsgroup (e.g., the newsgroup
name). For the profiles, we chose the FAQs
shown in Table 5. Notice that there is some, but
not perfect, overlap with the selected newsgroups
for the experiment:
• There are FAQs for rec.games.go and
comp.robotics, but no articles from either
group.
• There are two FAQs related to compression,
covering slightly different areas.
• There are articles for comp.graphics, but
no FAQ.
Given this setup, we ran the classification
procedure outlined above for all 778 newsgroup
articles against the 7 selected FAQs. Our results
are shown in Table 6. In the table, we can see the
following strong results:
• The security FAQ provides 77% coverage
of alt.security.
• The compilers FAQ provides 80% coverage
of comp.compilers.
• The compression and jpeg_compression
FAQs together provide 78% coverage of
comp.compression.
• The go FAQ picked up only 3 articles altogether,
indicating that its coverage is
almost completely disjoint from the five
selected newsgroups.
There are also these somewhat weaker
results:
• The robotics FAQ picked up 11 ai articles
and 23 graphics articles. This is probably
because of the relative proximity of these
subfields to robotics.
• The ai FAQ provides only 30% coverage of
the comp.ai group. Noticing that the ai
FAQ is nearly twice as large as the next
largest FAQ, we can speculate that it may
in fact cover too much material, thus
throwing off the statistical nature of the Ngram
frequency measure. This may also
reflect the fact that comp.ai really consists
of several related but distinct subgroups
(expert systems, connectionism/neural networks,
vision systems, theorem provers,
etc.) that happen to share the same newsgroup.
• The articles from comp.graphics were distributed
among the other FAQs. This is not
unexpected since we did not include the
FAQ from comp.graphics for the articles to
match to. It is interesting that the strongest
matching FAQ for these articles was
jpeg_compression, which covers a compression
standard for graphical data, and
thus was a strong plausible contender for
the match. It earned a 44% coverage of
comp.graphics.
Overall, the system works quite well given
the somewhat noisy nature of the newsgroups,
and the necessarily incomplete nature of the FAQ
lists. Although we do not analyze it here, cursory
manual examination of the results showed that
when the system matched an article against the
incorrect FAQ, the correct FAQ was generally the
second choice. Another thing to keep in mind is
that we did not determine the actual contents of
each article to see if it rightly belonged to the
group it appeared in. In Usenet newsgroups, spurious
cross-posting of irrelevant articles (e.g.,
TABLE 4. Article Samples
Group Abbrev. #Articles Covers
alt.security security 128 computer security issues
comp.ai ai 145 general artificial intelligence issues
comp.compilers compilers 66 programming language compilers and
interpreters
comp.compression compression 187 techniques and programs for data compression
comp.graphics graphics 252 general computer graphics issues
TABLE 5. Frequently Asked Question Articles
FAQ Size Origin
security 49K FAQ from alt.security
ai 132K FAQ from comp.ai
compilers 18K FAQ from comp.compilers
compression 75K basic FAQ from comp.compression
jpeg_compression 52K special FAQ from comp.compression devoted to the
JPEG standard for compressing graphics data
robotics 51K FAQ from comp.robotics
go 21K FAQ from rec.games.go (the game of go)
TABLE 6. Classification Results
Best-Matching Articles from Original Groups
FAQ security ai compilers compression graphics
security 99 69 2 29 63
ai 3 44 7 1 13
compilers 4 11 53 7 19
compression 14 5 1 65 21
jpeg_compression 8 4 1 81 113
robotics 0 11 2 2 23
go 0 1 0 2 0
Total 128 145 66 187 252
conference announcements for other slightly
related research areas) does happen on occasion,
and some of those are present in our samples.
Also, it is entirely possible for articles to be truly
interdisciplinary, e.g., an article on using
advanced AI techniques for detecting hacker
intrusion patterns could appear in alt.security.
Such an article might match strongly to two
groups simultaneously.
6.0 Advantages of the N-Gram
Frequency Technique
The primary advantage of this approach is that it
is ideally suited for text coming from noisy
sources such as email or OCR systems. We originally
developed N-gram-based approaches to
various document processing operations to use
with very low-quality images such as those
found in postal addresses. Although one might
hope that scanned documents that find their way
into text collections suitable for retrieval will be
of somewhat higher quality, we expect that there
will be a large amount of variability in the document
database. This variability is be due to such
factors as scanner differences, original document
printing quality, low quality photocopies, and
faxes, as well as preprocessing and character recognition
differences. Our N-gram-based scheme
provides robust access in the face of such errors.
This capability may make it acceptable to use a
very fast but low quality character recognition
module for similarity analysis.
It is possible that one could achieve similar
results using whole word statistics. In this
approach, one would use the frequency statistics
for whole words. However, there are several possible
problems with this idea. One is that the system
becomes much more sensitive to OCR
problems—a single misrecognized character
throws off the statistics for a whole word. A second
possible difficulty is that short passages
(such as Usenet articles) are simply too short to
get representative subject word statistics. By definition,
there are simply more N-grams in a given
passage than there are words, and there are consequently
greater opportunities to collect enough
N-grams to be significant for matching. We hope
to directly compare the performance of N-grambased
profiling with whole-word-based profiling
in the near future.
Another related idea is that by using N-gram
analysis, we get word stemming essentially for
free. The N-grams for related forms of a word
(e.g., ‘advance’, ‘advanced’, ‘advancing’,
‘advancement’, etc.) automatically have a lot in
common when viewed as sets of N-grams. To get
equivalent results with whole words, the system
would have to perform word stemming, which
would require that the system have detailed
knowledge about the particular language that the
documents were written in. The N-gram frequency
approach provides language independence
for free.
Other advantages of this approach are the
ability to work equally well with short and long
documents, and the minimal storage and computational
requirements.
7.0 Conclusions And Future
Directions
The N-gram frequency method provides an inexpensive
and highly effective way of classifying
documents. It does so by using samples of the
desired categories rather than resorting to more
complicated and costly methods such as natural
language parsing or assembling detailed lexicons.
Essentially this approach defines a “categorization
by example” method. Collecting samples
and building profiles can even be handled in a
largely automatic way. Also, this system is resistant
to various OCR problems, since it depends
on the statistical properties of N-gram occurrences
and not on any particular occurrence of a
word.
Although the existing system already has
demonstrated good performance, there is considerable
room for further work:
• Currently the system uses a number of different
N-grams, some of which ultimately
are more dependent on the language of the
document than the words comprising its
content. By omitting the statistics for those
N-grams which are extremely common
because they are essentially features of the
language, it may be possible to get better
discrimination from those statistics that
remain. It is also possible that the system
should include some additional statistics
for rarer N-grams, thus gaining further
coverage.
• It seems clear that the quality of the document
set affects the subject categorization
performance. We would like to experiment
with document sets that have a higher overall
coherence and quality. For example, it
would be interesting to test this technique
on a set of technical abstracts for several
different areas. By splitting the set for each
area into training and testing portions, then
computing the profile for each area from
the training set, we could repeat this experiment
in a more controlled way.
• In a related issue, the quality of the training
set in general greatly affects matching
performance. Although the FAQs were
easy to obtain and work with, other training
sets might have produced better results,
even for these newsgroups. Of necessity, a
FAQ lags the group it covers, since new
“hot” topics of discussion have not yet
made it into the FAQ. To test this, it would
be interesting to compare the FAQ-based
profiles with profiles derived from a separate
set of articles from the appropriate
newsgroups.
• The raw match scores the system produces
are largely useless by themselves except
for imposing an overall relative ordering of
matches for the various profiles. To correct
this, we must devise a good normalization
scheme, which would produce some sort of
absolute measure of how good a particular
match really is. This would allow the system
to reject some documents on the
grounds that their normalized scores were
so low that the documents did not have
good matches at all. Normalized scores
would also let the system determine if a
particular document lay between two classifications
because of its interdisciplinary
nature. A related idea would be to see how
well the system could predict which articles
get cross-posted to different groups
precisely because of their interdisciplinary
content.
• This type of document similarity measure
is ideally suited for document filtering and
routing. All that a user needs to do is collect
a representative set of documents that
cover the relevant topics, then compute an
overall profile. From that point on, it is
simple and cheap to compute the profile of
every incoming document, match it against
the user’s overall profile, and accept those
whose match scores are sufficiently good.
• This system currently handles only languages
that are directly representable in
ASCII. The emerging ISO-6048/UNICODE
standard opens up the possibility of
applying the N-gram frequency idea to all
of the languages of the world, including the
ideographic ones.
Acknowledgments
The authors gratefully acknowledge the very useful
remarks and suggestions for this paper by
David Lewis, of AT&T.
References
[1] Cavnar, William B. and Vayda, Alan J.,
“Using superimposed coding of N-gram
lists for Efficient Inexact Matching”, Proceedings
of the Fifth USPS Advanced Technology
Conference, Washington D.C.,
1992.
[2] Cavnar,William B. and Vayda, Alan J., “Ngram-
based matching for multi-field database
access in postal applications”, Proceedings
of the 1993 Symposium On
Document Analysis and Information
Retrieval, University of Nevada, Las
Vegas.
[3] Cavnar, William B., “N-Gram-Based Text
Filtering For TREC-2,” to appear in the
proceedings of The Second Text REtrieval
Conference (TREC-2), ed. by, Harman,
D.K., NIST, Gaithersburg, Maryland,
1993.
[4] Kimbrell, R.E., “Searching for Text? Send
and N-gram!,” Byte, May 1988, pp. 297-
312.
[5] Suen, Ching Y., “N-Gram Statistics for
Natural Language Understanding and Text
Processing,” IEEE Trans. on Pattern Analysis
and Machine Intelligence, Vol. PAMI-
1, No. 2, April 1979, pp.164-172.
[6] Zipf, George K., Human Behavior and the
Principle of Least Effort, an Introduction to
Human Ecology, Addison-Wesley, Reading,
Mass., 1949.

 deputies of the strongest cities awed and corrupted those of the               
 leaders became mercenary instruments for inveigling their countrymen.          
 government and her legislation. This circumstance alone proves a               
 nation we have made peace and war; as a nation we have vanquished              
 government itself; and there is nothing to check the inducements to            
 constitution, it emphatically illustrates the tendency of federal              
 of an adoption of the new Constitution or a dismemberment of the               
 bodies rather to anarchy among the members, than to tyranny in the             
 injustice, and confusion introduced into the public councils, have,            
 abetted by Athens and Sparta, refused to submit to the decree. The             
 commencing demagogues, and ending tyrants.                                     
 form the memorable Congress of 1774. That body recommended certain             
government, frequent appeals would, in a great measure, deprive                 
 the possession of different degrees and kinds of property                      
 chains, under which it is groaning at this hour.                               
 Theoretic politicians, who have patronized this species of                     
less adverse to the executive and judiciary departments. The                    
 unfriendly passions and excite their most violent conflicts. But               
 of the members on the federal head.                                            
 Achaeans, though weakenened by internal dissensions and by the                 
 and to inflict vengeance on sacrilegious despoilers of the temple.             
 or extensive republics are more favorable to the election of proper            
Had the Greeks, says the Abbe Milot, been as wise as they were                  
 or by other means, first obtain the suffrages, and then betray the             
 insuperable obstacle to a uniformity of interests. The protection              
 place in one national government.                                              
 as successors of Alexander, were rivals of the king of Macedon.                
 sentiments and views of the respective proprietors, ensues a                   
 party and faction in the necessary and ordinary operations of the              
 ADOPTION WILL AFFORD TO THE PRESERVATION OF THAT SPECIES OF                    
 society, the fewer probably will be the distinct parties and                   
 interests, the more frequently will a majority be found of the same            
 have already sufficient indications that it will happen in this as             
The influence of factious leaders may kindle a flame within                     
 circumstances and lesser interests; as by reducing it too much, you            
 The Amphictyons were the guardians of religion, and of the immense             
 time, be perfectly equalized and assimilated in their possessions,             
 commencing demagogues, and ending tyrants.                                     
expense of the other departments. The appeals to the people,                    
 increased variety of parties comprised within the Union, increase              
 influence on each other; and the former will be objects to which               
government hold their power, is derived, it seems strictly                      
 majority at the same time must be prevented, or the majority, having           
 Union gives it the most palpable advantage.                                    
 she had been a member, left her in the full exercise of her                    
 the one, by destroying the liberty which is essential to its                   
 in what degree, by restrictions on foreign manufactures? are                   
 nature. I am well aware that it would be disingenuous to resolve               
 the reasons on which they are founded. The consciousness of good               
 abetted by Athens and Sparta, refused to submit to the decree. The             
 confederation, and persevered in her union, she would never have               
 TO PRESERVE THAT UNION  THE NECESSITY OF A GOVERNMENT AT LEAST                 
 wrong election of the part we shall act may, in this view, deserve             
 regarded as the era in which that decision is to be made; and a                
 attached, provides a proper cure for it. The instability,                      
 increased variety of parties comprised within the Union, increase              
most influential part of the society. The nature of their public                
 in the substitution of representatives whose enlightened views and             
 attempts, from whatever quarter, to influence your decision in a               
As a weak government, when not at war, is ever agitated by                      
 number of unsocial, jealous, and alien sovereignties.                          
Whilst the Amphictyonic confederacy remained, that of the                       

'''World War II''' was the most extensive and costly [[war|armed conflict]] in the [[history of the world]], involving the great majority of the world's [[nation]]s, being fought simultaneously in several major theatres, and costing tens of millions of lives.
The German [[Polish September Campaign|invasion of Poland]] on [[September 1]] [[1939]] is the most common date in the West for the start of World War II. Others cite the Japanese invasion of China on [[July 7]], [[1937]], as the war's beginning, or even the [[1931]] Japanese incursion into [[Manchuria]]. The war ended in Europe with the surrender of Germany on [[May 8]], [[1945]], but continued in Asia and the Pacific until the [[Atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki|nuclear bombing]] of [[Hiroshima]] and [[Nagasaki]] and the subsequent [[V-J Day|Japanese surrender]] on [[September 2]] [[1945]].
There are several main [[Causes of World War II|causes of this conflict]], most important being unforeseen consequences of the [[Treaty of Versailles]], which ended [[World War I]], and of the [[Great Depression]], the worldwide economic disaster gave rise to [[nationalism]] and [[militarism]]. The lead-up to the war stretches back to [[Events preceding World War II in Europe|build-ups and smaller regional wars]] of the [[1930]]s, which slowly drew in more countries and culminated in massive battles with millions of combatants in the first half of the [[1940s]].
Fighting occurred across the [[Atlantic Ocean]], in the [[European Theatre of World War II|European theatre]] in and around eastern and western [[Europe]], in [[North Africa]] and the [[Middle East]] as well as across the [[Mediterranean Sea]], and in the [[Pacific War|Pacific theatre]] in the [[Pacific]], in [[Oceania]] and across much of [[East Asia]] and [[South East Asia]].
It was the first war in which air power was a significant factor and [[civilian]] suffering and terror a primary military strategy. The war [[list of World War II casualties by country|caused more casualties than any war in history]]. This was partly due to its unprecedented scale, the first uses of mass aerial bombings against civilian populations (a policy initiated by the German [[Luftwaffe]] against Poland and later used more extensively against German cities by the Allies), and the first application of industrial-age technology to enable the mass killing of unwanted civilians in [[extermination camp]]s; a significant part of the German war machine was diverted towards the execution of [[Jew]]s, [[Roma]], [[Slavs]] and other unwanted citizens in the [[Holocaust]]. In total, World War II caused the deaths of about two percent of the [[World population|population of the world]].
The war also saw the re-emergence of the United States from its [[isolationism]], the destruction and rebuilding of Germany and Japan into major industrial powers, the advent of the [[atomic bomb]], the emergence of the United States and the Soviet Union as global [[superpower]]s, closer integration of Europe in the form of a [[European Union]], the dissolution of the [[League of Nations]] and creation of the [[United Nations]], founded by the victorious Allies in order to prevent such a large and destructive conflict from ever happening again.
The post-war period set the stage for the [[Cold War]], with the [[Western Allies]] and most of [[Western Europe]] including [[West German]]y, [[Italy]], the [[United States]] and [[United Kingdom]] forming [[NATO]], and the [[Soviet Union]] and its [[Eastern Europe]] [[Satellite states|satellite]]s creating the [[Warsaw Pact]]. The struggle for dominance between these two alliances would last until the collapse of the Soviet Union in [[1991]].
==Participants==
''Main article: [[Participants in World War II]]''
Traditionally, the war is described as a conflict between two groups of powers: the [[Axis Powers|Axis]] and the [[Allies]]. The primary members of the Allies were the [[British Commonwealth]], the [[United States]], and the [[Soviet Union]]. The Axis primarily consisted of [[Nazi Germany]], [[Italy]], and the [[Empire of Japan]].
In reality, this network of alliances changed over time, with divisions within countries, shifts in alliances, and questionable practices by supposedly neutral countries. Countries that highlight complication with the Allied&ndash;Axis categorization include:
* [[France]], which was Allied at the start of the war, but was later divided into [[Vichy France]] and a German occupational government, with the [[Free French Forces]] controlling some French colonies;
* [[Italy]], where the association with Nazi Germany remained controversial and tentative until the German conquest of France, and which later surrendered to and joined the Allies following its invasion by Allied forces;
* The [[Soviet Union]], which actively participated in the invasion of [[Poland]] in a partnership with Nazi Germany, and extended its territory in [[the Baltics]] with German approval, but joined the Allies following an invasion by Nazi Germany in June [[1941]] which broke the [[Molotow-Ribbentrop Pact]] between them;
* [[Finland]], which initially received Allied sympathy, and some support, while defending itself from the Soviet invasion of the [[Winter War]] &mdash; a sympathy that diminished starkly after the aforementioned invasion of the Soviet Union, when the Red Army in the [[Continuation War]] attacked Finland again. In this conflict, Finland's northern part was defended by German forces, and Britain, but not the United States, [[declaration of war|declared war]] on Finland in support of the Soviet action.
In addition, many countries, although avowedly neutral, provided military volunteers and other support either to the Allies or to the Axis. For example, [[Spain]] supplied [[Blue Division|troops]] for use by Germany.
==Causes==
''Main article: [[Causes of World War II]]''
The Second World War originated from a variety of causes. Some of the most commonly mentioned include the aggressive rise of [[totalitarian]] [[ideology|ideologies]], and, from a narrower perspective, [[war reparation]]s demanded of Germany after [[World War I]], coupled with the effects of the [[Great Depression]] and the lack of raw materials in Japan.
The [[economic depression]] and [[inflation]] of these latter nations' [[currency]] contributed to the rise of [[facism|fascist]] ideals and fervent [[nationalism]], which, in turn, led to the [[militarism|militarization]] of the economy and mobilization of forces along key borders in these nations. With the rise of fascism, the foreign policies of the Axis nations became more aggressive and strained the Allied leadership.
==Prelude to War==
''Main article: [[Events preceding World War II in Europe]], [[Events preceding World War II in Asia]]''
Resentment of the victorious [[Power (international)|powers]]' treatment of the [[Weimar Republic]] in the [[aftermath of World War I]] and economic difficulties caused by [[war reparation]]s and the Great Depression allowed [[Adolf Hitler]]'s extreme [[nationalist]] [[NSDAP]] movement to come to power in Germany. Due to the fragile political situation, Hitler was able to assume emergency powers and virtual total control of the country.
Defying post-WWI treaties, he re-developed the German military by means of the democratic constitution that was later put aside. He re-militarised the border zone next to France, enforced the re-unification with [[Austria]] in the so-called [[Anschluss]], and with Franco-British approval he annexed parts of [[Czechoslovakia]].
In [[1922]] [[Benito Mussolini]] and the [[Fascist]] party had risen to power in Italy. Mussolini's Italian fascists shared some ideological goals with the German [[National Socialist]]s or Nazis and, although Mussolini distrusted Hitler, the two countries formed an agreement that became known as the "Rome-Berlin Axis" in 1936.
In the east, [[Japan]] had, as early as the late nineteenth century, begun to spread out across Asia, brought about by conflict between traditional Japanese practices and changing social conditions associated with rapid [[industrialization|industrialisation]] and [[modernization|modernisation]]. In [[1905]] Japan won an astounding victory over [[Russia]], and in [[1910]] it occupied [[Korea]] and made it a colony.
During the [[1920s]] democracy seemed to be taking root in Japan, but by
the [[1930s]], the [[Great Depression]] brought to the fore many talented military leaders who took control of Japan, often ruling in the name of Emperor [[Hirohito]], and playing on the traditional respect the Japanese people held for their emperors. In [[1931]], Japan invaded and occupied [[Inner Manchuria]], setting up the puppet state of [[Manchukuo]], and by [[1937]] launched a second invasion that occupied the rest of the region. For this reason, some scholars consider 1936/37 the actual start of World War II.
== European Theatre ==
''Main article: [[European Theatre of World War II]], [[The end of World War II in Europe]]''
In [[1939]], Hitler laid claim to parts of [[Poland]] and concluded the [[Molotov-Ribbentrop Pact]] with the [[Soviet Union]] in response to Britain's and France's supportive defence alliance with Poland of March 1939.
The German [[Wehrmacht]] then [[Polish September Campaign|invaded Poland]] on [[1 September]], and on [[3 September]] [[1939]], Britain and France declared war on Germany (''[[Media:Chamberlain-war-declaration.mp3|Listen to Neville Chamberlain declaring war on Germany]] (MP3, 1.32MB)''), however neither French nor British troops [[Western_betrayal#The_Phony_War|gave any significant assistance to the Poles]] during the entire September Campaign.
On [[17 September]] the Soviet [[Red Army]] joined the invasion, and, hours after that, the [[Polish government-in-exile|Polish government]] [[Romanian Bridgehead|evacuated the country for Romania]]. Hostilities in Poland ended on [[6 October]] with the final [[Battle of Kock (1939)|Battle of Kock]]. Over the following months [[Polish contribution to World War II|Poland managed to rebuild its armies]] in France and Britain and remained an important combatant throughout the entire war.
In October ''[[Unterseeboot 47|U-47]]'' sank [[HMS Royal Oak|HMS ''Royal Oak'']] in [[Scapa Flow]] and the [[Luftwaffe]] carried out bombing raids on British naval bases at [[Rosyth]] and [[Scapa Flow]].
In December [[1939]], the German [[pocket battleship]] [[Admiral Graf Spee]] engaged British naval forces in the [[Battle of the River Plate]] in South America. The German warship retreated into [[Montevideo]] harbour and was scuttled shortly thereafter.
The period from the conclusion of the invasion of Poland in October 1939 until the German invasion of the [[Benelux]] countries and [[France]] in May 1940, became known as the ''[[Phony War]]''. The German and Soviet forces were moved from the attack on Poland. The Red Army concentrated on the [[Baltic region|Baltic]] countries and on [[Finland]], where the [[Winter War]] became a focus of the world's interest in the absence of other hostilities.
Meanwhile, the Wehrmacht moved north and invaded Denmark and Norway in [[Operation Weserübung]]. France mobilised and manned its heavily-defended border (The [[Maginot Line]]) against the [[Rhine]] and the British sent a large expeditionary force to France. However, apart from a brief attack by the French across the Rhine, there were little in the way of hostilities as both sides built up their forces.
In May of 1940 German forces attacked the [[Low Countries]] ([[The Netherlands]], [[Belgium]] and [[Luxembourg]]). The three countries were occupied quickly, all of their governments and monarchs fleeing to [[London]], except for the Belgian king [[Leopold III of Belgium|Leopold III]] who stayed in his country.
[[France]] was then invaded via the Low Countries, bypassing the Maginot Line. The Germans' [[Blitzkrieg]] tactics succeeded in defeating the French and British armies in France. The [[British Expeditionary Force]] (BEF) evacuated from [[Dunkirk]] in [[Operation Dynamo]], leaving their heavy equipment and their French allies behind. When German tanks overran most of France, the French State collapsed and a new government made a peace, leaving the Germans in control of the North and the [[Vichy France|Vichy government]] in (nominal) charge of the South.
The [[Luftwaffe]] was unable to defeat the [[Royal Air Force]] in the [[Battle of Britain]] and gain the air superiority needed to invade Britain. Instead, they began a [[strategic bombing]] campaign, which the British called [[the Blitz]], and attempted to blockade Britain into submission in the [[Battle of the Atlantic (1940)|Battle of the Atlantic]]. Britain failed to succumb to either tactic.
Meanwhile the geography of the Europe was changed: Soviet Union occupied [[Latvia]], [[Lithuania]] and [[Estonia]] (June, [[1940]]), and annexed [[Bessarabia]] and Northern [[Bukovina]] from [[Romania]] ([[June 28]] [[1940]]).
[[Italy]] attacked [[Greece]] on October 28 1940 and suffered the first [[Axis]] defeat. Though [[Hitler]] had no plans for Greece at that time, he was forced to send troops to occupy Greece (since Greece's [[neutral country|neutrality]] was broken) on April of 1941. This resulted in the delay of [[Operation Barbarossa]] and the loss of precious troops (see the [[Battle of Crete]]).
In June 1941, Germany attacked the Soviet Union, with whom they had previously signed a [[non-aggression pact]], starting what is known in Russia as the [[Great Patriotic War]] ([[Russian language|ru]]:, ''Velikaya Otechestvennaya Voyna''). The Russians were caught largely by surprise and the Wehrmacht initially conquered vast areas of territory, capturing hundreds of thousands of troops.
The Soviets withdrew, and managed to move most of their heavy industry away from the front line and re-establish it in more remote areas. Tenacious, sacrificial defence prevented the Germans from capturing [[Moscow]] ([[Hero City]]) by the time winter set in (see [[Battle of Moscow]]). Hitler, expecting the campaign to be over in a few months, had not equipped their armies for winter fighting.
Five days after the Soviets launched their counter-attack on [[December 11]], [[1941]], Germany declared war on the United States following the [[Attack on Pearl Harbor]] by [[Japan]] - see [[World_War_II#Asian_Theatre|Asian Theatre]].
In spring, the German army made further attacks on the Soviet Union but appeared to be unable to choose between a direct attack on [[Moscow]] and the capture of the [[Caucasus|Caucasian]] oilfields. Moscow was again spared and, at the end of 1942, the Soviets succeeded in smashing the Axis' front lines in the south and surrounding the German 6th Army, originally comprised of 300,000 men, in the [[Battle of Stalingrad]] ([[Hero City]]).
In February 1943, the paltry remnant of the 6th Army surrendered. The loss could have been avoided had Hitler taken Stalingrad when it was devoid of Soviet troops; however, he mistakenly believed it was too well defended. In retrospect, Goebbels' [[Sportpalast speech]] marks their recognition that [[total war]] was a necessary response to the Allies' advances.
In the spring, the Wehrmacht was able to restore the front line and make a successful riposte in the [[Second Battle of Kharkov]] but their offensive at the massive [[Battle of Kursk]] (July 1943) was so unsuccessful that the Red Army were able to counterattack and regain the ground previously lost.
From that time forward, the Soviet Union had the initiative in the East. By early 1944, the Red Army had reached the border of Poland and ended the [[Siege of Leningrad]].
The German disaster at Stalingrad was promptly followed by a disaster of similar importance in Tunisia (see [[World War II#African and Middle Eastern Theatre|African theatre]] below), resulting in the loss of the last Axis foothold in North Africa and the capture of a quarter of a million German and Italian [[POW]]s (May 1943).
Thereafter, the Allies used North Africa as a springboard for the [[Operation Husky|invasion of Sicily]] (July 1943) and [[Allied invasion of Italy|mainland Italy]] (September 1943), which [[Winston Churchill]] described as "the soft underbelly of Europe".
Italy surrendered but German troops moved to disarm the Italians and set about defending the country on their own. They established a series of tough defensive lines in mountainous country that was ideally suited to defence and progress by the Allies was slow.
The Allies invaded [[Normandy]] in [[Operation Overlord]] on [[June 6]] [[1944]] and liberated most of France and the Low Countries by the end of the year.
On [[June 9]], the Soviet Union began an offensive on the [[Karelian Isthmus]], forcing German co-belligerent Finland out of the war. On [[June 22]], the Soviets began [[Operation Bagration]]; 2.5 million men and 6,000 tanks attacked along a 1,000-kilometre front, completely destroying the 500,000-man German [[Army Group Centre]] and taking 350,000 prisoners.
Romania surrendered in August and Bulgaria on September. The Germans withdrew from Balkans and managed to hold their position in Hungary until February 1945.
After a desperate counteroffensive by the German army in the Ardennes during the [[Battle of the Bulge]] in December 1944, the Allies entered Germany in [[1945]]. By now, the Soviets had reached the eastern borders of the German [[Reich]] and her fate was sealed.
The Red Army captured [[Vienna]] on [[April 14]] and the final assault on Berlin began on [[April 16]]. As the Russians surrounded [[Berlin]], Hitler and his staff moved into the bunker underneath the Chancellery. There, on [[30 April]] [[1945]], Adolf Hitler committed suicide as Russian shells exploded in the Chancellery garden above.
It had been twelve years and three months since the time he had become dictator of Germany. He had appointed Admiral [[Karl Dönitz]] President of Germany prior to his suicide but, one week later, the German armed forces surrendered unconditionally on [[8 May]] [[1945]] (the documents were signed on [[7 May]] and the surrender to Soviet forces occurred on [[9 May]]).
Throughout the period of the war, [[Ireland]], [[Switzerland]], [[Spain]], [[Portugal]], and [[Sweden]] remained officially [[neutral country|neutral]]. In Ireland, the conflict is referred to as [[The Emergency]].
== Pacific Theatre ==
''Main article: [[Pacific War]]''
In 1940, Japan occupied French Indochina (Vietnam) upon agreement with the [[Vichy Government]] and despite local Free French, and joined the Axis powers Germany and Italy. These actions intensified Japan's conflict with the United States and the United Kingdom which reacted with an oil boycott.
The Japanese had already invaded [[China]] before World War II started in Europe. U.S. [[Franklin Delano Roosevelt|President Roosevelt]] signed an executive order in May of 1940 allowing U.S. military personnel to resign from the service so that they could participate in a covert operation in China. Hence was born the All Volunteer Group, more commonly known as Chennault's [[Flying Tigers]]. With the United States and other countries cutting exports to Japan, Japan decided to [[attack on Pearl Harbor|bomb Pearl Harbor]] on [[7 December]] [[1941]] without warning or declaration of war. Severe damage was done to the American [[Pacific Fleet]], although the [[aircraft carrier]]s escaped as they were at sea. Japanese forces simultaneously invaded the British possessions of [[Malaya]] and [[Borneo]] and the American occupied [[Philippines]], with the intention of seizing the oilfields of the [[Dutch East Indies]]. The British island fortress of [[Singapore]] was captured in what Churchill considered one of the most humiliating British defeats of all time.
In May 1942, the Allied navies in the [[Battle of the Coral Sea]] thwarted a Japanese naval attack on [[Port Moresby]], [[New Guinea]] which had it succeeded would have put them within striking range of [[Australia]]. This was both the first successful opposition to Japanese plans and the first naval battle fought only between aircraft carriers. A month later the U.S. Navy again prevented the invasion of [[Battle of Midway|Midway Island]], this time destroying four Japanese carriers, which Japanese industry could not replace, and putting the Japanese navy on the defensive.
However, in July the Japanese Army attempted an overland attack on Port Moresby, along the rugged [[Kokoda Track]]. Australian reservists, many of them very young and untrained, fought a stubborn rearguard action, until they were relieved by Australian regular troops returning from action in the [[Middle East]].
The Allied leaders had agreed even prior to the American entry to the war that priority should be given to the defeat of Germany. Nonetheless US and Australian forces under General [[Douglas MacArthur]] began to attack captured territories, beginning with, against the bitter and determined defence of Japanese troops, [[Battle of Guadalcanal|Guadalcanal Island]]. On [[7 August]] [[1942]] the island was assaulted by [[United States Marines]]. In late August and early September, while battle raged on Guadalcanal, Australian forces fought off a Japanese amphibious attack on the eastern tip of New Guinea at [[Battle of Milne Bay|Milne Bay]], the first conclusive defeat suffered by Japanese land forces. US forces triumphed on Guadalcanal in February 1943.
Exhausted Australian and US forces then strove to retake the occupied parts of [[New Guinea]] and the Dutch East Indies, experiencing some of the toughest resistance of the Pacific Theatre. The rest of the [[Solomon Islands]] were retaken in 1943, [[New Britain]] and [[New Ireland]] in 1944. The Philippines were attacked in late 1944 following the [[Battle of Leyte Gulf]].
US and Allied submarines and aircraft also attacked Japanese merchant shipping, depriving Japanese industry of the raw materials she had gone to war to obtain. The effectiveness of this stranglehold increased as the U.S. captured islands closer to the Japanese mainland.
The Nationalist [[Kuomintang]] Army under [[Chiang Kai-shek]] and the [[Communist Party of China|Communist]] Chinese Army under [[Mao Zedong]] both opposed the Japanese occupation of China, but never truly allied against the Japanese. Conflict between Nationalist and Communist forces continued after and, to an extent, even during the war.
Capture by the Allies of islands such as [[Battle of Iwo Jima|Iwo Jima]] and [[Battle of Okinawa|Okinawa]] close to Japan brought the homeland within range of naval and air attacks, [[Tokyo]] was firebombed and later an [[atomic bomb]], the "Little Boy", was dropped from the B-29 "Enola Gay" and destroyed [[Hiroshima]]. On [[8 August]] [[1945]] the Soviet Union declared war on Japan, as had been agreed to at Yalta, and launched a large scale invasion of Japanese occupied Manchuria (operation [[August Storm]]). On [[August 9]], in [[Nagasaki]], another atom bomb, "Fat Man" was dropped by the B-29 "Bock's Car". The Japanese surrendered on [[14 August]] [[1945]], signing official surrender papers on [[2 September]] [[1945]] aboard the USS Missouri in Tokyo Bay.
== African and Middle Eastern Theatre ==
The [[North African Campaign]] began in [[1940]], when small British forces in [[Egypt]] turned back an Italian advance from [[Libya]]. This advance was stopped in [[1941]] when German forces under [[Erwin Rommel]] landed in Libya. In addition, in [[June]] [[1941]] the [[Australian Army]] and allied forces invaded [[Syria]] and [[Lebanon]], capturing [[Damascus]] on [[17 June]]. Rommel's [[Afrika Korps]] advanced rapidly eastward, laying siege to the vital seaport of [[Tobruk]]. The Australian and British troops in the city resisted all until relieved, but a renewed Axis offensive captured the city and drove the Eighth Army back to a line at [[El Alamein]].
The [[First Battle of El Alamein]] took place between [[July 1]] and [[July 27]], [[1942]]. German forces had advanced to the last defensible point before [[Alexandria]] and the [[Suez Canal]]. However they had outrun their supplies, and a British and Commonwealth defence stopped their thrusts. The [[Second Battle of El Alamein]] occurred between [[October 23]] and [[November 3]], [[1942]] after [[Bernard Montgomery]] had replaced [[Claude Auchinleck]] as commander of the Eighth Army. Commonwealth forces took the offensive and destroyed the Afrika Korps. Rommel was pushed back, and this time did not stop falling back until [[Tunisia]].
To complement this victory, on [[8 November]] [[1942]], American and British troops landed in [[Morocco]] and [[Algeria]] in [[Operation Torch]]. The local forces of [[Vichy France]] put up limited resistance before joining the Allied cause. Ultimately German and Italian forces were caught in the pincers of a twin advance from [[Algeria]] and Libya. Advancing from both the east and west, the Allies completely pushed the Wehrmacht out of [[Africa]] and on [[May 13]], [[1943]], the remnants of the Axis forces in North Africa surrendered. 250,000 prisoners were taken; as many as at [[Stalingrad]].
North Africa was used as the jumping-off point for the invasions of [[Sicily]] and mainland [[Italy]] in 1943.
==Consequences==
In contrast to [[World War I]], the Western victors in the Second World War did not demand compensation from the defeated nations. On the contrary, a plan created by U. S. Secretary of State [[George Marshall]], the "European Recovery Program", better known as the [[Marshall Plan]], called for the [[Congress of the United States|U.S. Congress]] to allocate billions of dollars for the reconstruction of [[Europe]]. Also as part of the effort to rebuild global capitalism and spur post-war reconstruction, the [[Bretton Woods system]] was put into effect after the war.
Since the [[League of Nations]] had obviously failed to prevent the war, a new international order was constructed. In 1945 the [[United Nations]] was founded. Also, in order to prevent such devastating war from occurring again and to establish a lasting peace in Europe, the [[ECSC|European Coal and Steel Community]] was born in 1951 ([[Treaty of Paris (1951)]]), which became the predecessor of the [[European Union]].
The future [[Warsaw Pact]] countries did not subscribe to the Marshall Plan. In the [[Paris Peace Treaties, 1947|Paris Peace Treaty]], the Soviet Union's enemies [[Hungary]], [[Finland]] and [[Romania]] were required to pay [[war reparations]] of $300,000,000 each (in 1938 dollars) to the USSR. [[Italy]] was required to pay $360,000,000, shared chiefly between [[Greece]], [[Yugoslavia]] and the Soviet Union.
In the areas occupied by Western Allied troops, capitalist governments were created, in the areas occupied by Soviet troops, communist governments were created. Germany was partitioned into four zones of occupation, with the American, British and French zones grouped as [[West Germany]] and the Soviet zone as [[East Germany]]. [[Austria]] was once again separated from Germany and it, too, was divided into four zones of occupation which eventually re-united and became the state of Austria. The [[Cold War]] had begun, and soon [[NATO]] and the [[Warsaw Pact]] would form.
The repatriation, pursuant to the terms of the [[Yalta Conference]], of two million Russian soldiers who had come under the control of advancing American and British forces, resulted for the most part in their deaths.
The massive research and development involved in the [[Manhattan Project]] in order to quickly achieve a working [[nuclear weapon design]] greatly impacted the scientific community, among other things creating a network of national laboratories in the United States. In addition, the pressing for numerous calculations for various things like [[Colossus computer|code breaking]] and ballistics tables kickstarted the development of electronic [[computer]] technology.
In the military sphere, World War II marked the coming of age of airpower, mostly at the expense of warships. While the pendulum continues to swing in this never-ending competition, air powers are now a full partner in any military action. World War II also saw the creation of [[guided missile]]s which, like airpower, are now used in virtually every conflict.
The war was the high-water mark for mass armies. While huge armies of low-quality troops would be seen again (during the [[Korean War]] and in a number of African conflicts), after this victory the major powers relied upon small highly-trained and well-equipped militaries.
After the war, many high-ranking Germans were prosecuted for [[war crime]]s, as well as the mass murder of the [[Holocaust]] committed mainly on the area of [[General Government]], in the [[Nuremberg trials]]. Similarly Japanese leaders were prosecuted in the [[Tokyo War Crime Trial]]. Although the deliberate targeting of civilians was already defined as a war crime and it had been used extensively by both sides, most notably in Poland, Britain, Germany and Japan, those responsible were never tried for it. In other countries, notably in Finland, the Allies demanded the political leadership to be prosecuted in "[[war-responsibility trials]]" &mdash; i.e. not for ''crimes'' of war.
The defeat of Japan, and her occupation by American Forces, led to a [[westernization]] of Japan that was surely more far-reaching than would otherwise have occurred. Japan approximated more closely to a Western style democracy and, because of her defeat by the USA, set out to imitate the United States. This huge national effort led to the post-war Japanese economic miracle and Japan's rise to become the world's second largest economy.
The destruction of Europe and the destruction, via aerial bombing, of a significant proportion of the United Kingdom's cities would also symbolically destroy the aura of invincibility the European nation had in the eyes of their colonies. Coupled with the enormous amount of money it had expended during the war, an empire was perceived to be an unnecessarily expensive possession. Thus this would provoke the rapid [[decolonisation]] process that would see the empires of the United Kingdom, France and others swept away.
==World War II military history by country==
* [[Military history of Germany during World War II]]
* [[Military history of Britain during World War II]]
* [[Military history of Italy during World War II]]
== Military engagements ==
===Major Campaigns===
*[[September Campaign]], "Fall Weiss"
*[[Operation Weserübung]]
*[[Battle of France|Fall of France]], "Fall Gelb"
*[[Balkans Campaign]], "Unternehmen Marita"
*[[Operation Barbarossa]]
*[[North African Campaign]]
*[[Italian Campaign]]
*[[Operation Overlord]]
===Battles===
*[[Battle of the border]]
*[[Battle of Bory Tucholskie]]
*[[Battle of Bzura]]
*[[Battle of Tomaszów Lubelski]]
*[[Battle of Kock (1939)|Battle of Kock]]
*[[Battle of France]], "Fall Gelb"
*[[Battle of Dunkirk]], "Dynamo"
*[[Battle of Britain]]
*[[Battle of Crete]]
*[[Battle of Smolensk (1941)|Battle of Smolensk]]
*[[Battle of Minsk]]
*[[Battle of Kiev]]
*[[Battle of Moscow]]
*[[Second Battle of Kharkov]]
*[[Battle of Stalingrad]]
*[[Third Battle of Kharkov]]
*[[Battle of Kursk]]
*[[Operation Bagration]]
*[[First Battle of El Alamein]]
*[[Second Battle of El Alamein]]
*[[Battle of Normandy]], "D-Day" or "Operation Overlord"
*[[Battle of Tali-Ihantala]]
*[[Operation Market Garden]], "Battle of Arnhem"
*[[Battle of Monte Cassino]]
*[[Battle of Warsaw (1944)|Battle of Warsaw]], "Warsaw Uprising"
*[[Battle of the Bulge|Battle of Ardennes]], "Battle of the Bulge"
*[[Battle of Hurtgen Forest]]
*[[Battle of Seelow Heights]]
*[[Battle of Berlin]]
*[[Battle of Leyte]]
*[[Battle of Peleliu]]
*[[Battle of Iwo Jima]]
*[[Battle of Okinawa]]
*[[Battle of Lugou Bridge]]
*[[Battle of Tai er zhuang]]
*[[Battle of Changsha]]
*[[Battle of Hundred Regiments]]
*[[Battle of Milne Bay]]
*[[Battle of Prachuab Khirikhan]]
===Sieges===
*[[Siege of Warsaw]]
*[[Siege of Leningrad]]
*[[Siege of Lwów]]
*[[Siege of Modlin]]
*[[Siege of Novorossiysk]]
*[[Siege of Odessa]]
*[[Siege of Sevastopol (1942)|Siege of Sevastopol]]
*[[Siege of Tobruk]]
===Naval engagements===
*[[The Battle of the River Plate]]
*[[First Battle of Narvik]]
*[[Second Battle of Narvik]]
*[[Battle of the Atlantic (1940)|Battle of the Atlantic]]
*[[Battle of Cape Matapan]]
*[[Battle of Pearl Harbor]]
*[[Battle of the Coral Sea]]
*[[Battle of Midway]]
*[[Battle of the Komandorski Islands]]
*[[Battle of Guadalcanal]]
*[[Battle of Leyte Gulf]]
===Major bombing campaigns===
* [[Bombing of Warsaw in World War II|Warsaw]]
* [[Bombing of Rotterdam in World War II|Rotterdam]]
* [[Coventry]]
* [[London]] [[The Blitz|"The Blitz"]] and the [[V1 Flying Bomb |V1]] and [[V2 rocket |V2]] campaigns
* [[Baedeker Blitz|Baedeker raids]]
* [[Battle of Pearl Harbor|Pearl Harbor]]
* [[Battle of Stalingrad|Stalingrad]] 23 August 1942
* [[Helsinki]] February 1944, was mostly ineffective due to air defence and deception.
* [[Tallinn]] February - March 1944. Bombed by Soviet ADD. Large-scale damage.
* [[Narva]] March 1944. Evacuated town was destroyed by Soviet ADD.
* [[Bombing of Tokyo in World War II|Tokyo]] bombed several times
* [[Bombing of Hamburg in World War II|Hamburg]]
* [[Bombing of Kassel in World War II|Kassel]]
* [[Rostock]] Heinckel Airplane Construction Plant, Seaport, and City
* [[Lübeck]]
* [[Bombing of Dresden in World War II|Dresden]]
* [[Atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki|Hiroshima]] One nuclear weapon dropped from a B-29, devastating a city.
* [[Atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki|Nagasaki]] One nuclear weapon dropped from a B-29, devastating a city.
* [[Bombing of Chungking in World War II|Chungking]]
===See also===
*[[Strategic bombing survey]] for the overall impact of the bombing.
==Defensive lines==
*[[Atlantic Wall]]
*[[Gustav Line]]
*[[Maginot Line]]
*[[Mannerheim Line]]
*[[Siegfried Line]]
*[[GHQ Line]]
*[[Taunton Stop Line]]
== Political and social aspects of the war ==
*[[Appeasement]]
*[[Occupation of Denmark]]
*[[German children 1933-1945]]
*[[Nazi children]] in the times of peace
*[[Gold Star Mothers Club]] for those mothers who lost their children, KIA
*[[United States Political Leadership in World War II]]
== Production and logistics ==
The Axis lost, at least partly because the Allies, after the USA's and the Soviet Union's entrance into the war, had greater productive resources, and were able to turn these resources into greater numbers of soldiers and weapons than the Axis. This was further compounded by the comparative lack of equipment standardization among the Axis forces and its failure to use its large territorial (and associated resources) gains in an economy on war footing. For instance Germany was the only war economy which largely didn't make use of the labour of women.
* [[American tank production during World War II]]
* [[German tank production during World War II]]
* [[Soviet tank production during World War II]]
* [[WW2 aircraft production]]
* [[US weapon production (1942-1945)]]
==Common military awards==
===Soviet Union===
*[[Hero of the Soviet Union]]
*[[Order of Lenin]]
*[[Order of Suvorov]]
*[[Order of the October Revolution]]
*[[Order of the Red Banner]]
*[[Order of Victory]]
<!-- the list is incomplete -->
In Soviet Union orders and medals were also awarded to cities and military divisions. <!-- I don't know if that was common in other countries, I think not -->
===United States===
*[[Medal of Honor]]
*[[Silver Star]]
*[[Bronze Star Medal]]
*[[Distinguished Flying Cross (USA)|Distinguished Flying Cross]]
*[[Air Medal]]
*[[World War II Victory Medal]]
*[[Asiatic-Pacific Campaign Medal]]
*[[European-African-Middle Eastern Campaign Medal]]
*[[American Campaign Medal]]
===United Kingdom===
*[[Victoria Cross]]
*[[Air Force Cross (UK)|Air Force Cross]]
*[[Order of the Bath]]
*[[Order of the British Empire]]
*[[Distinguished Flying Cross (UK)|Distinguished Flying Cross]]
*[[Africa Star]]
*[[Pacific Star]]
===France and Belgium===
*[[Croix de Guerre]]
===Poland===
*[[Krzyz Walecznych|Cross of the Valorous]]
*[[Order of Polonia Restituta]]
*[[Virtuti Militari]]
===Germany===
*[[Iron Cross]]
== Related articles ==
* [[Italian aircraft production 1935 to 1945]]
* [[Italian fighter aces of World War Two]]
* [[Holocaust]]
* [[Sonderaktion Krakau]]
* [[Timeline of the Second World War]]
* [[Axis Powers]]
* [[Generalplan Ost]]
* [[World War]]
* British [[Women's Land Army]]
* [[Polish contribution to World War II]]
* [[Free French Forces]]
* [[Deutsches Afrika Korps]]
* [[Potsdam Agreement]]
* [[Sino-Japanese War (1937-1945)]]
* The [[Operation Chastise|Dambusters raid]]
* [[Devil's Brigade]]
* [[Operation Shingle]]
* [[Pursuit of Nazi collaborators]]
* [[Special Operations Executive]]
* [[Female roles in the world wars]]
* [[Continuation War]]
* [[Lapland War]]
=== Lists ===
* [[List of World War II Theatres and Campaigns]]
* [[List of countries involved in World War II]]
* [[List of World War II casualties by country]]
* [[List of people associated with World War II]]
* [[List of World War II Veterans]]
* [[List of equipment used in World War II]]
* [[List of units using the B-26 Marauder during World War II]]
* [[List of World War II aces by country]]
* [[Glossary of WWII German military terms]]
== References ==
* [[Winston Churchill|Churchill, Winston]] (1948-53), ''The Second World War'', 6 vols.
* [[Martin Gilbert|Gilbert, Martin]] (1995) ''Second World War'', Phoenix, ISBN 1857993462
* [[John Keegan|Keegan, John]] (1989) ''The Second World War''
* [[B.H. Liddell Hart|Liddel Hart, Sir Basil]] (1970), ''History of the Second World War'' Cassel & Co; Pan Books,1973, London
* [[Williamson Murray]] and [[Allan R. Millett]] (2000) ''A War to Be Won: Fighting the Second World War'' ISBN 067400163X
* [[Richard Overy]], ''Why the Allies Won'', Pimlico, 1995. ISBN 0712674535
* [[Gerhard L. Weinberg]], ''A World at Arms: A Global History of World War II'' ([[1994]]) ISBN 0521443172
Welcome to Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia that anyone can edit.
In this English version, started in 2001, we are currently working on 869,028 articles.
Wikipedia FAQs - Browse - A–Z - Portals - Ask a question - Site news
Culture | Geography | History | Mathematics | People | Science | Society | Technology
The quarterly Wikimedia fundraiser will run until Friday, January 6, 2006.
Please see the letter from the board for further details.
Today's featured article

Java is an object-oriented programming language developed initially by James Gosling and colleagues at Sun Microsystems. It was intended to replace C++, although the feature set better resembles that of Objective-C. Sun Microsystems currently maintains and updates Java regularly. Specifications of the Java language, the Java Virtual Machine (JVM) and the Java API are community-maintained through the Sun-managed Java Community Process. Java was developed in 1991 by Gosling and other Sun engineers, as part of the Green Project. After first being made public in 1994, it achieved prominence following the announcement at 1995's SunWorld that Netscape would be including support for it in their Navigator browser.
Recently featured: Canadian House of Commons – Shoe polish – KaDee Strickland
Archive – By email – More featured articles...
Selected anniversaries
December 17: National Day in Bhutan (1907)

	•	1843 - A Christmas Carol, a fictional novella about Ebenezer Scrooge, was first published by Charles Dickens (pictured).
	•	1862 - American Civil War: General Ulysses S. Grant issued General Order No. 11, expelling Jews from Tennessee, Mississippi, and Kentucky.
	•	1903 - Orville and Wilbur Wright aboard the Wright Flyer conducted the first successful flight of a powered fixed-wing aircraft.
	•	1944 - Malmédy massacre: Waffen-SS troops under Joachim Peiper shot at about 150 unarmed prisoners of war with machine guns near Malmedy, Belgium.
	•	1989 - The Simpsons made their debut as an animated series on the Fox television network.
Recent days: December 16 – December 15 – December 14
Archive – By email – More anniversaries...
In the news

	•	The New York Times reports that the National Security Agency has received presidential authorization to conduct warrantless domestic wiretaps.
	•	The Iraqi interior ministry indicates Abu Musab al-Zarqawi was captured in Fallujah sometime in 2004, but then released by mistake.
	•	Elections are held for the first permanent National Assembly of Iraq under the new Constitution.
	•	Marwan Barghouti founds al-Mustaqbal, in a split from Fatah, currently leading the Palestinian National Authority.
Wikinews – Recent deaths – More current events...
Today's featured picture

The Golden Gate Bridge is a suspension bridge spanning the Golden Gate, the opening into the San Francisco Bay from the Pacific Ocean. The entire bridge including the approach spans is 1.7 miles (2,727 m) long, whilst the main span between the towers is 4200 feet (1280 m). The two towers rise 746 feet (230 m) above the water. From its completion in 1937, the center span was the longest among suspension bridges until 1964 when the Verrazano Narrows Bridge was erected.
Photo credit: Daniel Schwen
Archive – More featured pictures...
Weekdays: Did You Know — Weekends: Picture of the Day

Kahaani (IPA: [kəˈɦaːni]; "Story") is a 2012 Indian Hindi mystery thriller film directed and co-produced by Sujoy Ghosh. It stars Vidya Balan as Vidya Bagchi, a pregnant woman searching for her missing husband in Kolkata during the festival of Durga Puja, assisted by Satyoki "Rana" Sinha (Parambrata Chatterjee) and Khan (Nawazuddin Siddiqui).

Made on a shoestring budget of INR80 million (US$1.3 million),[3][4] Kahaani was conceived and developed by Ghosh, who co-wrote the film with Advaita Kala. The crew often employed guerrilla-filmmaking techniques on Kolkata's city streets to avoid attracting attention. The film was noted for its deft portrayal of the city and for making use of many local crew and cast members. Kahaani explores themes of feminism and motherhood in male-dominated Indian society. The film also makes several allusions to Satyajit Ray's films such as Charulata (1964) and Aranyer Dinratri (1970).

Kahaani was released worldwide on 9 March 2012. Critics praised the screenplay, the cinematography and the performances of the lead actors. Following critical acclaim and word-of-mouth publicity, the film earned INR1.04 billion (US$16 million) worldwide in 50 days. The film won several awards, including three National Film Awards and five Filmfare Awards. The latter included trophies for Best Director (Ghosh) and Best Actress (Vidya).

Contents

    1 Plot
    2 Cast
    3 Production
        3.1 Development
        3.2 Casting
        3.3 Characters
        3.4 Filming
    4 Themes and influences
    5 Soundtrack
    6 Marketing and release
    7 Reception
    8 Impact
    9 Shelved sequel
    10 Notes
    11 References
    12 External links

Plot

A poison-gas attack on a Kolkata Metro Rail compartment kills the passengers on board. Two years later Vidya Bagchi (Vidya Balan), a pregnant software engineer, arrives in Kolkata from London during the Durga Puja festivities in search of her missing husband, Arnab Bagchi. A police officer, Satyoki "Rana" Sinha (Parambrata Chatterjee), offers to help. Although Vidya claims that Arnab went to Kolkata on an assignment for the National Data Center (NDC), initial investigations suggest that no such person was employed by the NDC.

Agnes D'Mello, the NDC's head of human resources, suggests to Vidya that her husband resembled former employee Milan Damji (Indraneil Sengupta), whose file is probably kept in the old NDC office. Before Agnes can provide any further help she is killed by Bob Biswas (Saswata Chatterjee), an assassin working undercover as a life insurance agent. Vidya and Rana break into the NDC office and find Damji's file, barely escaping an encounter with Bob, who is searching for the same information. Meanwhile, the attempts to obtain Damji's records have attracted the attention of two Intelligence Bureau (IB) officials in Delhi—the chief Bhaskaran K. (Dhritiman Chatterjee) and his deputy Khan (Nawazuddin Siddiqui). Khan arrives in Kolkata and reveals that Damji was a rogue IB agent responsible for the poison-gas attack. In spite of Khan's warnings, Vidya continues her search, fearing that Arnab's resemblance to Damji may have led him into trouble.

The address on Damji's record leads Vidya and Rana to a dilapidated flat. An errand boy from the neighbourhood tea stall identifies R. Sridhar, an NDC officer, as a frequent visitor to Damji's flat. Bob attempts to kill Vidya, but fails, and is run over by a Tempo during a chase. Examination of Bob's mobile phone leads Vidya and Rana to an IP address sending instructions to kill her. They break into Sridhar's office to verify his IP address, but he is alerted electronically and returns to his office. Vidya accidentally shoots Sridhar dead during a scuffle, which upsets Khan, who had wanted him alive.

Sridhar's computer data reveals a code, which when deciphered reveals Bhaskaran's phone number. Vidya calls Bhaskaran to tell him that she has retrieved sensitive documents from Sridhar's office. She asks Bhaskaran to help find her husband in exchange for the documents, but Bhaskaran tells her to contact the local police. Vidya soon gets a call from an unknown number however, warning her that she should hand over the documents to the caller if she wishes to see her husband alive. Khan thinks the caller is Milan Damji.

Vidya goes to meet Damji, followed by Rana and Khan. Damji cuts the meeting short when Vidya expresses her doubt that he will be able to return her husband in exchange for the sensitive file, and he attempts to leave. Vidya tries to stop him, and in the ensuing struggle Damji draws a gun on her. Vidya disarms him using the prosthetic belly she has been using to fake her pregnancy, before shooting him with his own gun. She flees into the crowd before the police arrive, leaving a thank you note for Rana and a pen drive containing data from Sridhar's computer, which leads to Bhaskaran's arrest. Rana concludes that no Vidya or Arnab Bagchi ever existed, and that Vidya had been using the police and the IB to achieve her own ends.

Vidya is revealed to be the widow of Arup Basu (Abir Chatterjee), an IB officer and Damji's colleague, who was killed in the poison-gas attack. In her mission to avenge his death, Vidya was helped by retired IB officer Pratap Bajpayee (Darshan Jariwala), who suspected the involvement of a top IB official.
Cast

    Vidya Balan as Vidya Venkatesan Bagchi
    Parambrata Chatterjee as Satyoki "Rana" Sinha
    Nawazuddin Siddiqui as A. Khan
    Indraneil Sengupta as Milan Damji
    Dhritiman Chatterjee as Bhaskaran K.
    Saswata Chatterjee as Bob Biswas
    Darshan Jariwala as Captain Pratap Bajpayee
    Abir Chatterjee as Arup Basu
    Shantilal Mukherjee as R. Shridhar, chief technical officer at the NDC
    Kharaj Mukherjee as Inspector Chatterjee, a friendly inspector at the Kalighat Police Station.
    Colleen Blanche as Agnes D'Mello
    Nitya Ganguli as Mr. Das, the guest house owner.
    Ritabrata Mukherjee as Bishnu, a worker at the guest house.
    Pamela Bhuttoria as Sapna, an employee at NDC.
    Kalyan Chatterjee as Paresh Pal, a clay artist and a police informer.
    Riddhi Sen as Poltu, a worker at a tea-stall.
    Massod Akhtar as Rasik Tyagi, systems supervisor at the NDC

Production
Development

Sujoy Ghosh approached novelist and script writer Advaita Kala with the idea for the film.[5] Kala took inspiration from her experience in Kolkata, where she had followed her boyfriend in 1999, akin to the protagonist in the film.[6] She reported that despite facing a language barrier and the chaos and poverty of the metropolis, she was charmed by the warmth of the people, which was reflected in the film.[7] Kala started writing in 2009 and finished the 185-page script by February 2010.[8][9] Her research included reading the books Open Secrets: India's Intelligence Unveiled by Maloy Krishna Dhar and India's External Intelligence: Secrets of Research and Analysis Wing (RAW) by V. K. Singh.[6]

Ghosh, who co-wrote the story and the screenplay, began to plan the film while awaiting the release of his previous film Aladin (2009), but the dismal response to Aladin was a setback. He had to approach several producers to finance him for Kahaani, but was refused[10] and discouraged from making the film owing to three factors: a pregnant woman as the lead star, a bunch of unknown Bengali actors as the supporting cast and Kolkata as a backdrop.[11] Yashraj Films were willing to produce the film, but wanted Ghosh to sign a three-film deal, which he declined because he did not want that much commitment.[10]

Bengali film actor Prosenjit Chatterjee encouraged Ghosh to shoot in Kolkata.[12] Ghosh finally selected Kolkata for several reasons: the director's acquaintance with the city, its mix of modernity and old-world charm,[12] and budget constraints. Kolkata is a cheaper location than Mumbai or Delhi, where most Bollywood films are shot.[13]

Ghosh admitted in an interview that after his two preceding directorial ventures—Aladin and Home Delivery (2005)—performed poorly at the box office, Kahaani was his last chance to create a niche as a director.[14] He added that the film's plot twist came somewhat accidentally. Having described the skeleton of the story to a friend during its development, the friend called him back a few days later to enquire about his film. The friend had mistakenly imagined sequences which he assumed to be parts of the plot, from which the twist ending was derived.[15]
Casting
Vidya Balan (on right) and Sujoy Ghosh(on left)
Vidya Balan (on right) was the first choice of director Sujoy Ghosh (on left) for the leading role in the film.

Vidya Balan was the first choice of both writer Advaita Kala and director Sujoy Ghosh.[7] Ghosh had planned for a long time to work with Vidya and approached her in 2010.[16] Unimpressed with the plot outline, Vidya refused, only changing her mind after having read the completed script.[17]

Ghosh chose mostly Bengali actors as he wanted to make the characters as authentic as possible.[18][19] The role of the Inspector Satyoki "Rana" Sinha was first offered to Chandan Roy Sanyal, but he could not take the part due to other commitments.[20] Parambrata Chatterjee, a Bengali actor whose acting in the film The Bong Connection (2006) had impressed Ghosh at the Mumbai Academy of the Moving Image festival, was later offered the role in Kahaani.[21] Chatterjee had earlier worked with Vidya in her début film Bhalo Theko (2003).[22]

The casting director Roshmi Banerjee suggested Nawazuddin Siddiqui for the role of Khan. Siddiqui, who had only had minor roles in Bollywood up to that time, was surprised that for the first time he would not have to portray a beggar.[10] Saswata Chatterjee, another Bengali actor, was surprised as well when he was offered the role of the contract killer Bob Biswas. He thought there were suitable actors in Hindi film industry for the role.[23] He said that Ghosh had known him since childhood and was impressed with his acting, so he wanted him as Bob Biswas.[24]

Ghosh went against the expectations of casting a popular actor from Bollywood. He signed Bengali actor Abir Chatterjee to play Vidya's husband. According to Ghosh, popular Bollywood actors were not willing to work with him after his two previous flops. He also believed that audience might expect more screen-time from a better-known actor.[25] Several other Bengali film and television actors, such as Indraneil Sengupta and Kharaj Mukherjee, were cast in supporting roles.[20]
Characters

Before the shooting of the film began, Vidya started to use a prosthetic belly to look as close to authentically pregnant as possible. According to news reports, she met doctors and pregnant women to learn about the typical lifestyle and nuances of a pregnant woman, and also made lists of rules and superstitions followed by pregnant women.[26] Vidya said that during her college days she often used to imitate pregnant ladies during stand-up acting among friends, an experience that helped her during the shooting.[27]

While briefing Saswata Chatterjee about his character, the cold-blooded killer Bob Biswas, Ghosh used the phrase "Binito Bob" (meaning polite Bob), which crystallised the notion of Bob's manners. Further discussions led to the inclusion of paunch and a bald patch. Chatterjee devised the mannerism of rubbing his nails together as some Indians believe doing that helps prevent hair loss. The mannerism was well-noted and praised by the viewers.[24] Ghosh was surprised at how Bob Biswas was greeted by fans as a cult figure. He emphasised that the deliberate ordinariness of Bob Biswas was portrayed so convincingly by Chatterjee that the viewers can expect Bob to be around them at any time and any place.[28]

Parambrata Chatterjee said in an interview that he did not identify with the Rana character, owing to the difference between his own urban upbringing and Rana's rural background.[29] Chatterjee visited police stations and did some research "on their work, mindset and other relevant things" to prepare for the role.[29] The character Khan was envisaged as a ruthless, arrogant, expletive-spewing officer who cares nothing about the emotional or social consequences of his behaviour.[30] Siddiqui said that he was surprised on being offered the role, and wondered how he could portray the arrogance needed for the character.[31] Ghosh built Khan as a character with lean physical build but full of mental strength, loyalty and patriotism. Khan smokes a relatively cheap brand of cigarette (Gold Flake) despite his high official post; Siddiqui had smoked that brand of cigarette throughout his struggling days in Bollywood and thereafter.[10]
Filming
One woman smearing the face of another with vermilion
The climax showed Sindoor khela, a ritual on the last day of Durga Puja in which married women smear each other's face with sindoor (vermilion).

Filming took place on the streets of Kolkata, where Ghosh often employed the art of guerrilla filmmaking (shooting in real locations without any previous knowledge given to onlookers) to avoid unwanted attention.[32][33] The cinematographer Setu, who had assisted others in the past to shoot documentaries in Kolkata, said that unlike majority of Indian films, Kahaani was shot mostly without artificial light.[34] The film was shot in 64 days,[35] during which the Durga Puja festival of 2010 took place. Shooting locations in Kolkata included Kalighat Metro station, Nonapukur tram depot,[a] Kumartuli, Howrah Bridge, Victoria Memorial, old houses of North Kolkata and others.[37][38] The climax, which takes place on the night of Vijayadashami (the last day of Durga Puja), was shot on the night of Vijayadashami in the premises of a Barowari (publicly organised) Durga Puja celebration in the Ballygunge neighbourhood of Kolkata. Most of the crowd in the climax were not actors. Some actors mingled with the crowd engaged in Sindoor khela[b]—their job was to appreciate the camera angles and accordingly apply sindoor (vermilion) on Vidya's face so that accidental exposure of her eyes to sindoor could be avoided.[10]

Ghosh chose the guest house in which the protagonist stays after noticing it during his visit to a neighbouring hotel in April 2010. He booked it for 10 days for INR40,000 (US$630), and requested the guest-house employees to keep the shooting schedule a secret. Choosing a room with windows overlooking a busy road, he proceeded to give it an old-fashioned look by replacing the windows' designer grilles with old-fashioned wooden ones, and by painting the room with some rough patches.[41]
Themes and influences

After Ishqiya (2010), No One Killed Jessica (2011) and The Dirty Picture (2011), Kahaani was Vidya's fourth woman-centric film[42] to win widespread praise for her unconventional approach to portraying strong female roles.[43][44][45] According to Zee News, Kahaani is a woman's film about "role reversals, breaking of stereotypes, turning clichés inside out, a woman's journey, and the way she carves a niche for herself in the male-dominated mentalscape of the society."[46] Trisha Gupta of The Indian Express also finds feminist themes in the film.[47] For Ghosh, one aspect of his project "is a study of motherhood"; the instinct of a mother to protect her baby inspired him to develop the story.[48]

A recurring theme is the fleeting hint of romance between Rana and Vidya. Ghosh said that this delicate romance was "the most progressive thing" in the film—a suggestion that a man could fall in love with a pregnant woman. The director explained that the boy was initially "fascinated by someone who is literally a hero in his eyes", as Rana was awed by the computer skills of Vidya. Gradually, the fascinated boy moves into a zone where he tries to protect her.[49]
A road in Kolkata showing congested traffic and yellow taxis
A road in Kolkata showing congested traffic and yellow taxis. The deft portrayal of the city in the film was noted by reviewers.

Some reviewers note that a major protagonist is Kolkata itself, which is "brimming with warm, sympathetic inhabitants".[50] A review in Rediff.com notes that the director pays a "fond yet understated tribute" to the city by incorporating imagery such as "yellow taxis, leisurely trams, congested traffic, claustrophobic metros, dilapidated brick houses, tapering alleys, rajnigandhas,[c] lal paad saris,[d] piping hot luchis".[e] According to the reviewer, Kahaani did not depend on the tropes of Kolkata culture typically used in Bollywood film—"O-emphasizing accent, dramatic play of conch shells, rasgulla/mishti doi excesses."[50] The director acknowledges that Kolkata "becomes a central character" of the film.[37] Gautaman Bhaskaran, writing for Gulf Times,[54] notes that Kolkata imagery was polished up in the film; noted Bengali director Srijit Mukherji argues that the portrayal of the city in Kahaani was akin to a "Lonely Planet exotica" on the city.[55] Uddalak Mukherjee of The Telegraph explains that Kolkata in Kahaani was cosmetic and lacked a deep menacing presence.[56] Mukherjee argues the depiction of the city never matches the level of Satyajit Ray's Calcutta trilogy, where "aided by bloodshed, greed and decadence, ...Calcutta ..., even though a place of dreams, desires and hope, slides irreversibly into chaos, anxiety and a moral crisis, taking its residents with it".[56]

Durga Puja, the autumnal festival to worship goddess Durga, plays a prominent role in the story.[56] The allegorical yearly return of goddess Durga to slay the demon Mahishasura is alluded to at the end of the film.[56] According to Uddalak Mukherjee of The Telegraph, "Durga Puja, with its paraphernalia of idols, immersion processions, pandals, even an entire crowd of women draped in white saris with red borders, is central to the film's ... visual aesthetic."[56] A review in Rediff.com praised the depiction of the festivities in Kolkata, a city well known for its celebration of Durga Puja.[50]
A painting by Gaganendranath Tagore depicting the color inspiration of the film
The colour scheme of Kahaani was inspired by the painting Pratima Visarjan by Gaganendranath Tagore.

Ghosh acknowledges the allusions to Ray's films. In one scene, Vidya asks the manager of the guest house why there is no hot water although the signboard had claimed "running hot water". The manager explains that the sign refers for his errand boy, who runs to deliver hot water in a kettle whenever required. This alludes to a similar scene in Ray's Joy Baba Felunath (1979).[57] In an interview with The Telegraph, Ghosh says that the way Vidya looks out and moves from window to window in the guest-house room is reminiscent of Ray's Charulata (1964), where the actress Madhabi Mukherjee enjoys glimpses of the outside world through the blinds of windows. He also acknowledges the influence of Mahanagar (1963), another Ray film noted for its portrayal of Kolkata. According to the director, he was inspired by particular scenes of Ray's Nayak (1966) to plan the portrayal of complex emotional issues between Vidya and the police officer Rana, especially Rana's awe in the presence of Vidya. Ghosh expresses his inspiration from Ray's Aranyer Dinratri (1970) in which Ray "wanted the audience to be inside the car with the four guys all the time. So the camera never leaves the car." Ghosh shot a similar scene, hoping the audience would become "like Vidya's fellow passenger."[58]

Besides Ray's films, Ghosh also admits inspiration from what he calls "visually striking" films of the 1970s and 1980s, such as Deewaar (1975).[58] Critics have compared the fake-pregnancy twist of Kahaani with the 2004 American psychological thriller Taking Lives.[57] The sequences towards the end that explain the missing pieces of the mystery were compared with The Usual Suspects (1995).[59] Ghosh writes that the film was heavily influenced by the colour scheme of the Pratima Visarjan, a c.1915 watercolour by the Bengal School artist Gaganendranath Tagore.[10]
Soundtrack
Kahaani
Soundtrack album by Vishal–Shekhar
Released 	14 February 2012[60]
Genre 	Film soundtrack
Length 	28:18
Label 	Super Cassettes Industries Limited
Producer 	Abhijit Nalani, Mickey McCleary, Clinton Cerejo
Vishal–Shekhar chronology
The Dirty Picture
(2011) 	Kahaani
(2012) 	Shanghai
(2012)

The musical score was composed by Vishal–Shekhar, and the lyrics for the film's six songs were written by Vishal Dadlani, Anvita Dutt and Sandeep Srivastava. Several of R. D. Burman's Hindi and Bengali compositions were used in the background. An album of the music was released on 22 February 2012 and subsequently on the digital music platform Apple iTunes India since its inception from mid-2012.[60]

The soundtrack received positive reviews, and was praised for its amalgamation of Bengali and Hindi lyrics. A review in CNN-IBN states that the song "Ami Shotti Bolchi" is able to partially convey the feel of Kolkata, and that the soundtrack "features right voices with the overall mood of the album".[61] Mumbai Mirror rated the album with 3 stars out of 5.[62] Reviewing the soundtrack for Indiatimes, Anand Vaishnav commented that "Kahaani, as an album, stays honest to the theme of the film".[63]

All lyrics written by Vishal Dadlani, Anvita Dutt and Sandeep Srivastava, except where noted. 
No. 	Title 	Singer(s) 	Length 	
1. 	"Aami Shotti Bolchi"   	Usha Uthup, Vishwesh Krishnamurthy 	3:20
2. 	"Piya Tu Kahe Rootha Re"   	Javed Bashir 	4:59
3. 	"Kahaani (Male)"   	KK, Vishal Dadlani 	4:26
4. 	"Tore Bina"   	Sukhwinder Singh 	5:52
5. 	"Kahaani (Female)"   	Shreya Ghoshal, Vishal Dadlani 	4:28
6. 	"Ekla Cholo Re" (Rabindra Sangeet) 	Amitabh Bachchan 	5:13
Total length:
	28:18 	
Marketing and release

Kahaani '​s first-look poster was launched on 2 December 2011,[64] and the official trailer on 5 January 2012.[65] The poster, portraying a pregnant Vidya Balan and lacking any romantic element, was well received. Critics' expectations were low, owing to the director's previous box-office failures.[66] Vidya appeared in public with a prosthetic belly to promote the film, and mingled with the public in railway stations, bus stands and markets.[67][68] She often carried a sketch of her on-screen missing husband, and asked people to help in finding him.[67][69] Social-networking website Ibibo.com developed an online game, The Great Indian Parking Wars, which required players to park Vidya's taxi on a street; it was well-received, reaching 50,000 hits in 10 days.[70]
Actress Vidya Balan cuts a cake celebrating the success of Kahaani while actor Parambrata Chatterjee watches, along with several others.
Vidya (centre) and Chatterjee (to her right) celebrate the success of Kahaani.

On 5 March 2012, prior to release, Kolkata Metro authorities objected to a scene in which Vidya is pushed by a man onto the tracks as a train arrives. They requested that the scene be removed, as it would remind people of the past suicides, which had tarnished the railway's image.[71] The filmmakers screened the scene for the authorities and explained that nothing in the film would affect the image of the Metro or prompt people to commit suicide. Convinced, the officials withdrew their objections, and the scene was retained, although it was removed from trailers.[72]

Kahaani was released on 9 March 2012, a day after International Women's Day.[73] It played on 1100 screens worldwide.[74] CNN-IBN reported that although Kahaani was ready before The Dirty Picture, distributors deferred its release, fearing that Vidya's role of a sexy siren (in The Dirty Picture) after that of a pregnant woman might not be received well.[66] STAR TV bought the exclusive right to broadcast the film for a price of INR80 million (US$1.3 million),[75][76] which was the highest-ever price paid for a female-centric film in India.[76] The Indian television premiere of the film was on Star India's channel Movies OK on 3 June 2012.[77] The DVD of the film was released on 17 May 2012 across all regions in a one-disc pack in NTSC format.[78] Distributed by Shemaroo Entertainment,[79] it contained additional content, such as behind-the-scene footage, video of celebration parties after its theatrical release, and music videos of the songs of the film.[80] The VCD and Blu-ray versions were released at the same time.[81][82]
Reception
See also: List of accolades received by Kahaani
Professional ratings
Review scores
Source 	Rating
Bollywood Hungama 	4/5 stars[83]
CNN-IBN 	3.5/5 stars[84]
Hindustan Times 	3.5/5 stars[59]
Indo-Asian News Service 	4/5 stars[85]
Rediff 	4/5 stars[50]
The Hindu 	Favourable[86]
Outlook 	3/5 stars[87]
The Telegraph 	9/10 stars[88]
The Times of India 	4.5/5 stars[89]
Yahoo 	2.5/5 stars[90]
Zee News 	4/5 stars[91]

Kahaani garnered generally positive reviews from critics. According to review aggregator Review Gang the film received a rating of 7.5 out of 10,[92] based on the reviews by professional critics. Good word of mouth publicity played a part in its popularity besides the positive reviews.[93][94] The Telegraph called the film "a mind-juggling medley of manipulation masquerading as a 'mother of a story'".[88] Taran Adarsh of Bollywood Hungama gave the film 4 out of 5 stars, and praised Vidya's acting.[83] The Times of India commented "Once again, a 'pregnant' Vidya, ironically displays more 'male ornaments' ... than most heroes."[89] The reviews in Rediff,[50] Indo Asian News Service,[85] CNN-IBN,[84] Zee News,[91] Hindustan Times,[59] and The Hindu[86] were unanimously positive, and noted script, direction, cinematography, and acting as strong points of the film. Noted film actress and multiple National Award winner Shabana Azmi lauded Vidya for her performance,"As an actor, I could see she [Vidya] was making all the right moves throughout the film. There was not a single artificial note in her performance."[95] Russell Edwards, the reviewer for Variety, praised the cast, cinematography, and direction, and commented that despite occasional glitches, the "adroit thriller ... maintains momentum and credibility."[96]

Many reviewers criticised the film's climax and certain features, feeling that they deviated from its general style. Rituparna Chatterjee of CNN-IBN noted that the climax of the film was a "huge dampener" and explained, "The diabolic twist at that juncture got underplayed ... What follows is a sobfest ... the apologetic explanation of why she does what she does. Justifying her action comes across more as an effort to appease the Indian morality".[97] The Outlook review noted, "At times, Kahaani is too clever, at others extremely pedestrian like in the depiction of computer hacking and IB operations, not to speak of the ludicrous terrorist angle and the all-too predictable Durga Puja setting for that mythology tie-in."[87] It adds that the "spoon-feeding" of reasons at the end dampens the intrigue factor.[87] The review in Yahoo! India comments that the Durga metaphor at the end was enforced, and that the film over-indulged in Bengali stereotypes.[90] Gautaman Bhaskaran, in his review in Gulf Times, noted that the sometimes-handheld photography was "as irksome as the plot with a sleuth too many and cops galore."[54]

Though Kahaani received critical acclaim, it was a slow starter at the box office, opening to a poor response on the first day,[98][99] but gradually picking afterwards.[100] According to The Telegraph, the film earned almost INR20 million (US$310,000) from the state of West Bengal within the first three days of its release. At multiplexes in Kolkata, occupancy increased from 47% on Friday 9 March, the day of release, to 77% on 10 March and to around 97% on 11 March.[101] Box Office India, a website on Indian film trade, reported that the film collected nearly INR240 million (US$3.8 million) in its first week, well beyond its production cost of INR80 million (US$1.3 million).[102] It grossed INR190 million (US$3.0 million) in second week to make a two-week total of around INR430 million (US$6.8 million) in India;[103] this led Box Office India to declare the film a "Super Hit".[104] The film was successful in the international box office as well, garnering INR80 million (US$1.3 million) within 10 days of its release in seven markets—UK, US, UAE, Australia, New Zealand, Malaysia and Pakistan, according to Bollywood Hungama, a film-related website.[105] By the third week, according to CNN-IBN, it had grossed INR750 million (US$12 million), including India and overseas market.[74][106] Hindustan Times reported that Kahaani made a worldwide gross of INR1044.3 million (US$16 million) within 50 days of its release.[2]

Kahaani was nominated for, and won, many awards. The 58th Filmfare Awards nominated the film for six of their categories, where it won five, including Best Actress for Vidya and Best Director for Ghosh.[107][108] Kahaani received thirteen nominations at the 19th Colors Screen Awards, and won five, including Best Actress and Best Story.[109] At the 14th Zee Cine Awards, Kahaani won five awards, including Best Film (Critics) and Best Actress (Critics), out of fifteen nominations.[110][111] At the 2013 Stardust Awards ceremony, Kahaani was announced Hottest Film of the Year while Vidya received for the Best Actress in a Thriller or Action.[112] Kahaani was awarded the Most Entertaining Film of the Year at the 3rd ceremony of the BIG Star Entertainment Awards.[113] At the 60th National Film Awards, Ghosh won Best Screenplay (Original), Namrata Rao won Best Editing, and Nawazuddin Siddiqui won a Special Jury award.[114]
Impact

Following Kahaani '​s success, Kolkata became a preferred destination for Bollywood filmmakers.[115][116] They felt the landscapes of Mumbai and Delhi were overused for several decades, while Kolkata retained its unique visuals such as metro trains, rickety trams, hand-pulled rickshaws, dingy bylanes, British-era buildings, and iconic structures including Howrah Bridge and Victoria Memorial.[117]

Monalisa Guest House, the lodge which hosted Vidya Bagchi in the film, became a local attraction.[118] Several hundreds have visited it since the film's release, to the extent that the owners planned to increase tariffs and renovate the rooms around a Kahaani theme.[41]

The potbellied contract killer Bob Biswas became an Internet phenomenon, the subject of several jokes and pieces of pop art, which circulated through Facebook and Twitter.[119] "Nomoshkar, Aami Bob Biswas... Ek minute?" ("Hello, I am Bob Biswas... do you have a minute?")—the monologue he repeatedly uses just before murdering his victims—was used in different memes.[23] A graphic novel and a television show based on Bob Biswas were being planned, as of March 2012.[120][121]

Two remakes of Kahaani were released in 2014: a Telugu remake titled Anaamika, and its Tamil version Nee Enge En Anbe, both directed by Sekhar Kammula and featuring Nayantara as the lead character.[122][123] An English-language remake, entitled Deity, will be directed by the Danish director Niels Arden Oplev and produced by Yashraj Films, with production scheduled to begin in 2015.[124]
Shelved sequel

In March 2012, Sujoy Ghosh announced that he intended to develop Kahaani into a series. He was inspired by Satyajit Ray's Feluda detective series and wanted to continue the stories of Vidya Bagchi on similar lines, with Vidya Balan reprising the role.[125] The shooting of Kahaani 2 was scheduled to begin in 2013,[126] but in July 2013 differences arose between Sujoy Ghosh and other co-producers.[127] In February 2014, the film was shelved due to problems.[128]
"S&M" is a song by Barbadian singer Rihanna from her fifth studio album, Loud (2010). The song was released on January 21, 2011, as the fourth single from the album. The American songwriter Ester Dean wrote "S&M" in collaboration with the producers StarGate and Sandy Vee. Backed by bass beats, a keyboard and guitars, it is an uptempo hi-NRG and Eurodance track that samples the synthesizer line from Depeche Mode's 1984 song "Master and Servant". The lyrics revolve around sexual intercourse, sadomasochism, bondage and fetishes.

Critical response to "S&M" was mixed: some critics praised its sound and composition while others criticized its overtly sexual lyrics. After it reached number two on the United States' Billboard Hot 100 chart, a remix that features Britney Spears was released. When combined with sales of the solo version, it became Rihanna's tenth and Spears' fifth number-one single on the chart. It has been certified triple platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA). "S&M" peaked at number one in Australia, Canada and Poland, and reached the top five in France, Germany, Ireland, Spain and the UK.

To promote "S&M", Rihanna performed a shortened version at the 2011 Brit Awards and sang the remix with Spears at the 2011 Billboard Music Awards. Melina Matsoukas directed the song's music video, which was, in part, Rihanna's response to disparaging critics. It portrays softcore sadomasochist acts and fetishes. The music video was banned in many countries and restricted to nighttime television in others. Critics complimented Rihanna's sensuality and the vibrant colors. Photographer David LaChapelle filed a lawsuit alleging that the video incorporates ideas from his photographs. Rihanna and LaChapelle settled the case for an undisclosed sum of money.

Contents

    1 Concept and development
    2 Composition and lyrical interpretation
    3 Release and remixes
    4 Critical reception
    5 Chart performance
    6 Music video
        6.1 Background and synopsis
        6.2 Reception and ban
        6.3 Copyright infringement lawsuits
    7 Live performances and covers
    8 Formats and track listings
    9 Credits and personnel
    10 Charts
        10.1 Weekly charts
        10.2 Year-end charts
    11 Certifications
    12 Radio and release history
    13 See also
    14 Notes and references
    15 External links

Concept and development
A man wearing a black suit and white converse trainers.
Rihanna's vocals on "S&M" were recorded and produced by Kuk Harrell.

"S&M" was written by Ester Dean in collaboration with the song's producers, StarGate and Sandy Vee.[1] Dean explained its conception and the sexually suggestive lyrics to Gail Mitchell of Billboard: "The first thing that came to me was 'Come on, come on.' I'm thinking, 'I don't know what in the hell this is about to be.' And I remembered I'd seen something that said, 'Sticks and stones may break my bones.' Then came 'But chains and whips excite me.' When people have a great track that speaks to me, it feels like it already has a story in it".[2] Rihanna told Rolling Stone about her interest in bondage and other sadomasochism activities, themes central to "S&M": "I like to take charge, but I love to be submissive ... being submissive in the bedroom is really fun. You get to be a little lady, to have somebody be macho and in charge."[3]

"S&M" was recorded during Rihanna's Last Girl on Earth Tour: the instrumental parts for the song were recorded by Eriksen and Miles Walker at Roc the Mic Studios in New York City and the Westlake Recording Studios in Los Angeles, and by Vee at The Bunker Studios in Paris. Rihanna's vocals were recorded by Kuk Harrell and were produced by Harrell, Josh Gudwin and Marcos Tovar; Bobby Campbell assisted in the singer's vocal recording. Veronika Bozeman provided additional vocal production. The song was mixed by Vee at The Bunker Studios and by Phil Tan at The Ninja Beat Club in Atlanta, Georgia; additional and assistant engineering was carried out by Damien Lewis. All instrumental production was completed by Eriksen, Hermansen and Vee.[1]
Composition and lyrical interpretation
	
Rihanna – "S&M"
Menu
0:00
A 21-second audio sample of the song, which features the sampled synth line from Depeche Mode's song "Master and Servant".[4] The audio sample shows Rihanna chanting the hook "Na na na, c'mon," backed by synthesizers and a keyboard.[5][6]
Problems playing this file? See media help.

"S&M" is an uptempo hi-NRG and Eurodance song that lasts four minutes and three seconds.[7][8][9] The song is composed in the key of E-flat minor using common time and a moderate dance tempo of 128 beats per minute.[8] Instrumentation is provided by synthesizers, a keyboard and a guitar.[5][6][8] The song samples the synthesizer line from Depeche Mode's 1984 song "Master and Servant".[4] Chris Ryan of MTV described the song as a "steady-rocking dance track, with ominous, snarling keyboard sounds."[6]

During the track, Rihanna's vocal range spans one octave, from the low note of B3 to the high note of B4.[8] Proposing illicit acts, she uses a "sexually aggressive tone" in her vocal performance.[10] The lyrics are about sex, sadomasochism, bondage and BDSM fetishes, including the sexual fantasies and turn-ons of its protagonist.[11][12] The song opens with the hook, "Na, na, na, c'mon".[8] During the chorus the lyrics include, "'Cause I may be bad, but I'm perfectly good at it / Sex in the air, I don't care, I love the smell of it."[12] In the song, Rihanna describes herself as "bad" and openly praises her own sexual prowess;[6] lyrics include, "Sticks and stones may break my bones / But chains and whips excite me."[10][13] Rihanna told Spin magazine that the lyrics are metaphoric. She said that she thought the song was mainly about having confidence in one's identity, and about being impervious to rumors and criticism.[14] According to Jake Conway of Q Magazine at Yale, the lyrics are guilty of "divesting sex of emotion" and re-envisaging violence as fetish;[12] he went on to say that Rihanna pays homage to the sexual acts in an empowered dance and club mood.[12] Chris Ryan described the song as being about "dirty, naughty, illicit bedroom activities".[6]
Release and remixes
A blond woman sitting on a motorcycle. She is smiling and a back up dancer is standing to her right.
Britney Spears performing the remix of "S&M" on the Femme Fatale Tour in 2011

"S&M" was the fourth single from the album Loud to be released in the US and the third in other countries. It was sent to contemporary hit and rhythmic radio stations in the US on January 23, 2011,[15] and to urban playlists on February 27, 2011.[16] The single was released on iTunes Stores throughout Europe and South America on February 11, 2011.[9][17] In Argentina, Brazil and certain territories throughout Europe, the song was released as an extended play (EP) on February 18, 2011; this consisted of the single version of "S&M" and two remixes by Audé and Samson.[18] On February 28, 2011, a compilation was released worldwide as a digital package consisting of remixes by disc jockeys Audé, Samson and Joe Bermudez.[19] "S&M" was released as a CD single in France and Canada on March 22, 2011.[20][21] On April 11, 2011, the remix single featuring Britney Spears was made available to download worldwide.[22] In the United Kingdom, "S&M" was deemed too explicit for daytime airplay; it was edited to remove references to sex, chains and whips, and was renamed "Come On" for BBC Radio 1.[23][24]

A remix of "S&M" featuring rapper J. Cole was released on the internet on January 17, 2011.[25] After the release of the song's album version, Rihanna asked her followers on Twitter about potential collaborators, of which Spears was the most popular choice.[26] Twitter messages between the two artists caused speculation that they had recorded a remix of the song.[27] The remix, featuring guest vocals by Spears, was released on April 11, 2011.[28][a]
Critical reception

"S&M" received mixed responses from music critics. Sal Cinquemani of Slant Magazine described "S&M" as an ode to sadomasochism that compares to Janet Jackson's The Velvet Rope.[11] Conner felt that "S&M", as well as other Loud tracks "What's My Name?" and "Skin", were songs which allowed Rihanna to boast about how good she is in certain situations, as she did on Rated R. He chose the lyrics "I may be bad/ but I'm perfectly good at it... Chains and whips excite me" as an example of her vaunt.[30] USA Today '​s Steve Jones opined that "Loud '​s pulsating opener, 'S&M,' makes it clear from the jump where [Rihanna is] headed as she acknowledges that 'chains and whips excite [her]'",[10] while Leah Greenblatt of Entertainment Weekly called "S&M" an "explicitly carnal opener" with "late-night-Cinemax naughtiness".[31]

Jake Conway of Q Magazine at Yale agreed, writing that the lyrics of "S&M" display why the singer continues to be one of the most provocative recording artists in the music industry, highlighting how she "turns the tables on abusive ex-lover Chris Brown."[12] Digital Spy's Nick Levine gave the song a rating of four stars out of five, and wrote that the song makes the listener as "up-for it" as Rihanna herself; he went on to say that "S&M" consists of "ear-frotting" hooks, synths and pounding beats.[5] James Skinner of BBC Music wrote that Loud lacked the "chart-friendly moments" of Rated R and criticized the overtly sexual lyrics which he found "at odds with" the flirtatious appeal for which Rihanna was aiming. Skinner described the singer's vocal delivery as "forced" and criticized her for not projecting a "daring" or convincing sound on "S&M"[13]
Chart performance
"S&M" became Rihanna's tenth number one single on the US Billboard Hot 100 and tied her in fourth place with Janet Jackson (pictured) for female soloists who have topped the chart.[32]

"S&M" made its first chart appearance in the United Kingdom on November 15, 2010, at number 55.[33] It peaked at number three on March 5, 2011, where it remained for three consecutive weeks.[34] It was more successful on the UK R&B Chart, where it was number one for five consecutive weeks.[35] The song the second-biggest selling R&B or hip hop single of 2011 in the UK:[36] by December that year, "S&M" had sold 643,000 copies in the UK and was certified silver by the BPI.[37][38] Elsewhere in Europe, "S&M" was a commercial success and peaked within the top three in many countries.[b]

"S&M" debuted on the Australian Singles Chart at number 87 on November 29, 2010, upon the release of Loud.[50] When it was released as a single, it returned to the singles chart at number 27 on January 30, 2011.[51] The song peaked at number one on February 13, 2011, for five non-consecutive weeks.[51] It has since been certified four times platinum by the Australian Recording Industry Association, denoting shipments of over 280,000 copies of the single.[52] The song debuted on the New Zealand Singles Chart at number six on February 7, 2011.[53] It peaked at number two the following week for two consecutive weeks, and returned to its peak position again in its fifth week on the chart.[53] "S&M" was subsequently certified platinum by the Recording Industry Association of New Zealand, denoting sales of over 15,000 copies.[54]

In the US, the song debuted at number 53 on the Billboard Hot 100 on December 4, 2010.[55] The issue of Billboard published on April 30, 2011 reported that the album version of "S&M" and its official remix featuring Spears had sold a combined total of 293,000 downloads in the previous week; it replaced Katy Perry's "E.T." on the Hot 100. "S&M" became Rihanna's tenth US number-one single on the chart, tying her with Janet Jackson in fourth place for female soloists who have topped that chart; with only four years, eleven months and two weeks between her first and tenth number one on the chart, Rihanna achieved the milestone faster than any other solo artist.[32] It became Spears' fifth number-one single on the Hot 100.[32] "S&M" became Rihanna's eighth number-one song on the Pop Songs chart and she became the artist with the most number one songs in the chart's nineteen-year history.[56] The song was number one on the Hot Dance Club Songs chart,[57] and number 33 on the Hot Latin Songs chart.[58] It debuted at number 80 on the Hot R&B/Hip-Hop Songs in the February 26, 2011 issue of Billboard,[59] and peaked at number 59.[60] "S&M" peaked at number 24 on the Adult Pop Songs chart,[61] and at number 14 on the Latin Pop Songs chart.[62] The song has been certified triple platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA),[63] and has sold 3,543,000 digital copies in the US as of June 2013.[64] "S&M" ranked at number 15 on Billboard's "Best of 2011 – Pop Songs" chart,[65] and number two on its "Best of 2011 – Dance/Club Songs" chart.[66] In Canada, the song peaked at number one for the week of April 21, 2011.[67]
Music video
Background and synopsis

The director Melina Matsoukas filmed the music video for "S&M" in Los Angeles on January 15 and 16, 2011.[68][69] Matsoukas told Billboard that the video was inspired by Rihanna's "sadomasochist relationship with the press ... it isn't just about a bunch of whips and chains."[70] On January 27, 2011, a behind-the-scenes clip was posted on Rihanna's YouTube channel,[71] and the full music video premiered on Vevo on February 1, 2011.[72]

As the video opens, Rihanna is dragged into a press conference, where she is covered with plastic wrap and taped to a wall. Microphones and gagged reporters surround her.[70] In an outdoor scene, she wears a cream-colored latex dress and leads a gagged Perez Hilton around by a dog leash. Rihanna is then shown seated and surrounded by CCTV surveillance cameras; her chair begins to rotate, and she stands and begins to whip reporters, who are taped to the wall of the room. She then rolls on the floor, her hands and feet bound with rope. As the bridge of the song approaches, Rihanna wears a white latex bikini and rabbit ears, while images of headlines are projected against her body and the wall behind her. After the chorus, she appears in a newsroom. Reporters take photographs of her while she sprawls across a desk wearing a pink latex dress. Scenes of Rihanna and others in bondage gear are interspersed with images of the singer wearing a feather boa and a tube top with "censored" printed across it. The video then alternates between previous scenes and images in which Rihanna eats bananas, strawberries and cream, and jewel-covered ice cream. In the final scene, she lies on a newsroom desk, with a smiley face emblem over one eye and a Rolling Stones tongue logo over her mouth.[73][74]
Reception and ban

The music video was generally well received. A journalist for The Huffington Post wrote, "Rihanna is perfectly good at being bad – and this video proves it",[75] while a reviewer for OK! called the video "red-hot, kinky and totally tongue-in-cheek".[76] Willa Paskin of New York similarly described it as a "goofy" take on the S&M-themed music videos typical of Madonna and Lady Gaga,[77] while Matthew Perpetua of Rolling Stone described the video as a "visual onslaught of candy-colored kinkiness" that viewers would enjoy despite its bright colors and sexually suggestive activities.[78] Brad Wete of Entertainment Weekly stated that Rihanna delivered the risque video he was expecting based on the song's lyrical content,[79] and Jason Lipshutz of Billboard praised the video's "exquisite set pieces that offer a twisted take on hardcore sexuality".[70]

The video was immediately banned in eleven countries due to its overtly sexual content.[80] It was "flagged for content" by users on YouTube, which restricts access to its users under the age of 18.[81] Rihanna responded to the news via Twitter, writing, "They watched 'Umbrella' ... I was full nude".[81] An unrestricted version of the video was later uploaded to Rihanna's official website.[82] Melina Matsoukas responded to the news in an interview with MTV News, stating: "When I go out to make something, I kind of go out with the intention to get it banned – [well] not to get it banned ... but to make something provocative ... it's making an effect and people are having a dialogue about it, so, to me, that's successful."[83]
Copyright infringement lawsuits
Rihanna singing, facing to the camera. Three others are visible behind, in a pink striped room
Rihanna, in a scene from the video. The "pink room" scene was the subject of a US copyright infringement case

The video was involved in further controversy when photographer David LaChapelle sued Rihanna, Island Def Jam and related parties for copyright infringement.[84] LaChapelle alleged that the video infringed upon eight of his photographs published between 1997 and 2010 in GQ, i-D, Vogue Italia and elsewhere.[84] The lawsuit, which claimed unspecified damages, alleged that the video was "directly derived" from LaChapelle's pictures, copying their "composition, total concept, feel, tone, mood, theme, colors, props, settings, decors, wardrobe and lighting".[84] The lawsuit included claims of trade dress infringement under the Lanham Act, unfair competition under New York state law and unjust enrichment,[84] all of which were later dismissed.[85] Judge Shira A. Scheindlin of New York's Southern District Court denied a motion to dismiss the copyright violation allegations,[85] noting similarities between the works:

    Both works feature: hot-pink and white striped walls; two single-hung windows in the middle of the back wall; windows with glossy hot-pink casings and interior framework, with opaque panes exhibiting a half-vector pattern of stripes against a yellow background; a solid hot-pink ceiling; hot-pink baseboards; a hot-pink couch under the windows; women wearing frizzy red wigs; a woman posed on top of a piece of furniture; black tape wrapped around a man; and a generally frantic mood ... [Both works are] well-lit and intensely saturated, with all of the details in sharp focus and almost no shadows.[85]

In August 2011, a judge agreed that the " '​pink room scene', which shows Rihanna dominating a man in front of pink and white striped walls, was very similar to LaChapelle's "Striped Face" photograph; the judge pinpointed a scene where Rihanna is seen against a blue background, wearing pink latex and placing a sweet on her tongue."[86] Rihanna and LaChapelle settled the case out of court for an undisclosed sum.[86] After the case, LaChapelle said the lawsuit was "not personal, it's strictly business", and that "musicians commonly pay to sample music or use someone's beats and there should be no difference when sampling an artist's visuals."[86] In June 2011, German photographer Philipp Paulus sued Rihanna and her record labels, alleging further copyright violations with regard to a scene in the music video where Rihanna wears an expansive dress and is taped to the wall with a plastic sheet in front of her. According to Paulus, Rihanna and Matsoukas appropriated the image from his photographic series Paperworld.[87]
Live performances and covers

Rihanna first performed "S&M" at the BRIT Awards on February 15, 2011,[88] as part of a medley, which also incorporated two of her previous singles from Loud, "Only Girl (in the World)" and "What's My Name?".[89] Rihanna had planned to perform "S&M" only, to coincide with its release as a single in the United Kingdom, but she was instructed by the BRIT Awards corporation to "tone down the sexual references in the song's lyrics".[90] The singer was reported to be angered at being requested to change her act and that she was asked to consider performing a different song instead.[90] She changed the arrangement because the BRIT Awards corporation wanted to avoid complaints similar to those received following the finale of the seventh series of The X Factor, on December 11, 2010. Rihanna was criticized for wearing a provocative outfit and for performing a suggestive dance routine on The X Factor, branded as "disgusting", before the watershed, a system in the United Kingdom which does not allow adult content to be broadcast before 9 pm.[91] The singer performed "S&M" on the Australian leg of the Last Girl on Earth Tour in February and March 2011.[92]
A woman with red hair wearing a white PVC body suit is performing on a raise platform. She is singing into a microphone and is handcuffed to the stage.
Rihanna performing "S&M" on the Loud Tour in summer 2011, a performance similar to the one from the 2011 Billboard Music Awards

Rihanna opened the Billboard Music Awards with a performance of the "S&M" remix with Spears on May 22, 2011, at the MGM Grand Garden Arena in Las Vegas.[93] Rihanna and Spears wore bondage-style bodysuits; Rihanna's outfit was white, and she wore PVC thigh-high boots. Spears wore a black outfit, a mask and rabbit ears; both singers wore handcuffs. Rihanna began the performance seated and provocatively opened her legs as she simulated whipping sounds. The singers closed the performance with pole dancing, a pillow fight and a kiss on the cheek.[94] Rihanna performed "S&M" on May 27, 2011, on NBC's Today show's "Summer Concert Series", along with "Only Girl (in the World)", "What's My Name?" and "California King Bed".[95] She gave an interview about the album and about her controversial performance at the Billboard Music Awards with Spears.[96] When Rihanna was asked if she was surprised at the controversial reaction the performance prompted, she responded:

    It was cool. Nothing popped out. We didn't make out. I mean, I didn't really hear [that it was controversial], but I went up to Twitter to see what my fans thought about it and they were really enjoyed seeing [me and Britney Spears] up there together, so I mean, there will be some people who will think that that was too sexy but you're always gonna find that, you know. People will always talk whether you're doing bad or good. You just have to do you."[96]

The song was included on the set list of the Loud Tour, which began with the stage decorated as a stylized S&M set. The singer performed Prince's "Darling Nikki" with three semi-nude female dancers whom she spanked, groped and pretended to smack with a cane. "Darling Nikki" then transitioned into "S&M" and she took off her white tuxedo, revealing a white bondage corset and handcuffs.[97] "S&M" was featured on the set list of Spears' Femme Fatale Tour (2011), as part of a medley with "...Baby One More Time".[98] Rihanna performed "S&M" at Radio 1's Hackney Weekend on May 24, 2012, as the third song on the set list.[99] The song was included on most of Rihanna's 777 Tour in November 2012; a seven-date and seven-day-long promotional tour in support of the release of her seventh studio album, Unapologetic.[100][101][102][103] Lee Latchford-Evans of the British group Steps covered the song as part of a medley with Maroon 5 and Christina Aguilera's song "Moves like Jagger" in his solo section of The Ultimate Tour (2012).[104]

In the 2012 musical comedy film Pitch Perfect, "S&M" was sung as an a cappella version by Ester Dean, Alexis Knapp, Anna Kendrick, Rebel Wilson, Anna Camp and Brittany Snow. The ensemble's performance of the song appears on the film's soundtrack as part of a medley, "Riff Off". "Riff Off" was released as a single in 2012 and reached number 86 on the US Billboard Hot 100 chart.[105] The soundtrack also became the number one album on the US Top Soundtracks.[106]
Formats and track listings

    Digital download[9]

    "S&M" – 4:03

    Digital download – remixes[19]

    "S&M" (Dave Audé Radio) – 3:50
    "S&M" (Joe Bermudez Chico Radio) – 3:49
    "S&M" (Sidney Samson Radio) – 3:19
    "S&M" (Dave Audé Club) – 7:27
    "S&M" (Joe Bermudez Chico Club) – 5:17
    "S&M" (Sidney Samson Club) – 6:49
    "S&M" (Dave Audé Dub) – 6:29
    "S&M" (Joe Bermudez Chico Dub) – 5:17
    "S&M" (Sidney Samson Dub) – 6:50

	

    Extended play (EP)[18]

    "S&M" – 4:03
    "S&M" (Dave Audé Club) – 7:27
    "S&M" (Sidney Samson Club) – 6:49

    French/Canadian CD single[20][21]

    "S&M" – 4:03

    Digital download – remix single[22]

    "S&M" (Remix) (featuring Britney Spears) – 4:17

Credits and personnel

Recording

    Recorded at Roc the Mic Studios, New York; Westlake Recording Studios, Los Angeles, California; The Bunker Studios, Paris.

Personnel

    Songwriting – Mikkel S. Eriksen, Tor Erik Hermansen, Sandy Wilhelm, Ester Dean
    Production – StarGate, Sandy Vee
    Vocal production and recording – Kuk Harrell, Josh Gudwin, Marcos Tovar
    Assistant recording – Bobby Campbell
    Additional vocal production – Veronika Bozeman
    Instruments – Mikkel S. Eriksen, Tor Erik Hermansen, Sandy Vee

	

    Music recording – Mikkel S. Eriksen, Miles Walker, Sandy Vee
    Mixing – Sandy Vee, Phil Tan
    Additional engineering – Damien Lewis
    Background vocals – Ester Dean

Credits adapted from the liner notes of Loud, Def Jam Recordings, SRP Records.[1]

The 1850 Atlantic hurricane season was the most recent season excluded from the scope of the official Atlantic hurricane database. Although meteorological records are sparse and generally incomplete, they indicate that three significant tropical cyclones affected land, each causing some degree of damage. The first system struck North Carolina on July 18, causing significant damage before battering the Mid-Atlantic states with high tides, strong winds, and heavy rainfall. Torrential rainfall caused river flooding from Baltimore to Philadelphia, particularly along the Schuylkill River, which took the lives of 20 people in various incidents. Strong winds damaged property and public facilities in and around New York City, and damaging floods extended into central and northern New England. Crops and railroad infrastructure suffered throughout the entire region.

On August 22, a strong hurricane impacted Havana, Cuba, destroying fruit trees and disrupting shipping, before making landfall on the Florida Panhandle with an enormous storm surge. Coastal flooding was severe around Apalachicola, and as the storm moved inland, it generated destructive winds across the southeastern United States. Abundant precipitation fell from Georgia through Virginia, causing extensive flooding; one river swelled over 20 feet (6 m) above its normal height. The storm blew down crops and trees along its course, and toppled a large railroad bridge near Halifax, North Carolina. Offshore, a pilot boat collided with a larger ship in the rough seas and sank. Considered the worst storm in nearly 30 years in the tidewater region of Virginia, the cyclone briefly reentered the Atlantic off New Jersey before making landfall over New England. Strong winds and moderate to heavy rains plagued much of New England on August 24 and 25.

On September 7 and 8, a hurricane brushed the coastline from New York to Cape Cod with gusty winds and appreciable rainfall, and left many ships in distress. The system later struck Atlantic Canada, likely causing "great loss of property and lives",[1] though damage reports were limited. Fragmented records exist of other hurricanes, including two which remained over open seas in early September and the middle of October.

Contents

    1 Season summary
    2 Storms
        2.1 Mid-July
        2.2 Late August
        2.3 Early September
        2.4 Other storms
    3 See also
    4 References
        4.1 Specific
        4.2 General

Season summary

Attempts to catalog Atlantic hurricanes in the first half of the 19th century began as early as 1855, when Andrés Poey compiled information on just over 400 tropical cyclones from 1493 to 1855.[2] However, Poey listed only three of the five or more hurricanes that developed in 1850.[3] In his 1963 book, Early American Hurricanes, 1492–1870, weather researcher David M. Ludlum discusses, in greater detail, three significant tropical cyclones that impacted the United States in 1850. Unusually, all three heavily impacted the northeastern states; Ludlum compares the season to 1954, in which three major tropical systems impacted the Eastern Seaboard. More traditional hurricane targets, such as Florida, were spared the brunt of seasonal tropical cyclone activity in 1850, while the atmosphere farther north was abnormally tropical. Newark, New Jersey, had its warmest—and one of its rainiest—summers on record at the time, owing to frequent nearby hurricanes and the influx of tropical air.[4][5] Meteorological reports pertinent to the season were largely lost in a Smithsonian Institution fire in 1856, limiting what is known about hurricane activity in 1850.[6] As the season falls outside the scope of the Atlantic hurricane database (1851 onward) and its associated reanalysis project,[7] records are regarded as incomplete. Extant accounts of the storms in 1850 are chiefly based on private weather records and press reports, and only approximate storm tracks are known.[6]
Storms
Mid-July

The first documented hurricane in 1850 originated in the Caribbean Sea,[3] where it wrecked dozens of ships along the Windward Islands on July 11 and 12.[8] On July 18, the storm struck North Carolina from the south as a hurricane of at least Category 1 intensity (on the modern-day Saffir–Simpson hurricane wind scale) and proceeded northward.[9] Although the exact point of landfall is unknown, the system is believed to have moved ashore south of Cape Hatteras.[10] Ships just off the state's coast battled three days of hurricane conditions from July 15 to July 18. Onshore, "great damage" occurred from Wilmington to Elizabeth City.[11]

Intense wave action churned the Chesapeake Bay, while storm-heightened tides up to 6 ft (1.8 m) above normal flooded wharves and coastal communities.[12][13] The Baltimore area endured persistent gale-force winds accompanied by torrential rainfall.[14] As streams and rivers swelled above their banks,[15] cellars and streets became inundated by floodwaters. Many trees were blown down and numerous poorly built or unfinished buildings were destroyed. The storm cut telegraph communications between Baltimore and surrounding areas.[13] In the countryside, low-lying hay fields were flooded and most of the corn crop was decimated. At Bladensburg, Maryland, a train station and locomotive were washed into an adjacent flooded waterway. Arrivals of ships into port were delayed by the storm, which one captain held to be the worst he had ever observed, and some vessels incurred extensive damage.[13]

The storm's effects quickly spread northward. Winds at Philadelphia began to increase in the morning on July 18, becoming severe by the evening hours.[11] Air pressure fell to 993 millibars (29.3 inHg) early on July 19 as the hurricane's center passed to the west,[9][11] and the city received more than 4 inches (100 mm) of rainfall.[14] The storm wrought significant damage throughout the city, including to trees, signs, and structures.[16] A number of houses were demolished, and many more—including a large brick building near Rittenhouse Square—suffered damage.[17] Major freshwater flooding was observed in the area, especially along the Schuylkill River, which rapidly rose to its highest level since 1838. A large quantity of lumber was swept away, and several docks were submerged. Their "worst apprehensions realized", hundreds of residents worked hurriedly to mitigate damage from the flooding. Bridges over the river at Phoenixville were washed away, resulting in the deaths of four individuals. A lock of a dam upstream of Phoenixville gave way, destroying a boat and killing its occupants. Four men and a child reportedly drowned on the river's banks near Conshohocken. Railways were covered with up to 3 feet of water in low-lying spots.[17] Numerous small craft capsized on the Schuylkill and Delaware rivers.[16] Overall, 20 people died in various storm-related tragedies along the Schuylkill.[10]

The hurricane took a heavy toll on agriculture in the Mid-Atlantic states. Rampant flooding outside Philadelphia destroyed fruit orchards,[17] and in nearby Burlington, New Jersey, strong winds and heavy rainfall inflicted significant damage to crops on the night of July 18,[11] leaving entire fields of corn blown down.[17] The Delaware River burst its banks at Burlington, inundating nearby lowlands. Notable flooding also took place along the Lehigh River.[10] Telegraph lines north of Philadelphia were crippled, limiting communications in the storm's aftermath.[16] Throughout the region, downed trees blocked railways.[17]

"The parks are literally carpeted with boughs and leaves, and many beautiful trees are prostrate."
—The Brooklyn Daily Eagle, July 19, 1850[18]

Hurricane-force gusts buffeted Newark, New Jersey, and rainfall exceeded a weather observer's rain gauge capacity of 4.75 in (121 mm).[10] Strong winds imperiled New York City late on July 18 into the next morning; there was widespread tree damage, with branches and leaves littering the ground, and many specimens uprooted or snapped. The storm ruined awnings and tore metal roofs off several buildings.[10][18] Some ships in New York Harbor were ripped from their anchors and blown aground; further east, multiple coaster vessels were wrecked along the coast of Long Island. The winds and storm tides destroyed bath houses and other facilities at Coney Island.[10]

As the storm tracked northward through central New York State, it produced high southeasterly winds and heavy rainfall across most of New England. At Fort Trumbull along the coast of Connecticut, heavy rainfall starting early on July 19 accumulated to 3.24 in (82 mm).[10] At Hartford, flooding caused about $100,000 (1850 USD) in losses.[19] Southeasterly winds peaked at tropical storm-force. Damage to property and crops was confined to western New England, leaving areas such as eastern Massachusetts unscathed. Less substantial rain was reported at Providence, amounting to 1 in (25 mm).[10] The rain shield extended into far-northern New England, producing 5 in (130 mm) of precipitation at Montpelier, Vermont, and 3.23 in (82 mm) at Burlington.[11] The resultant flooding was in some cases the greatest in recent memory.[19]
Late August

A tropical system first observed near Barbados on August 16 proceeded to affect the Windward Islands before yielding hurricane conditions at Ponce, Puerto Rico, on August 20.[3][20] Two days later, the hurricane tracked over western Cuba,[19] causing severe weather conditions around Havana. The storm destroyed large swaths of banana and plantain trees, and all vessels in Havana Harbor dragged anchors at the height of the hurricane.[21]

The storm moved north over the eastern Gulf of Mexico, striking the Florida Panhandle between Pensacola and Panama City on August 23. Extremely high tides bombarded the Apalachicola area, resulting in extensive coastal flooding.[19][22] The hurricane destroyed wharves and left many ships damaged or foundered. Sea water intrusion inundated warehouses and streets in Apalachicola, and one street was made impassable by strewn debris and fallen trees.[23] Farther east, a bridge over the Wakulla River was washed away by raging floodwaters. A long period of high winds was reported at the state's capital city of Tallahassee.[22] The storm produced some strong winds in interior Georgia on its way to the Carolinas. The destruction of homes, crops, and trees was reported from Griffin through Augusta. Adverse conditions extended westward to Montgomery, Alabama, where the night of August 23 was marked by high winds and heavy rainfall.[22]

Southeasterly gales had a large impact on shipping interests off North Carolina. Several vessels were imperiled;[19] in one case a pilot boat capsized after colliding with another ship.[24] In light of this incident, the hurricane is listed in the National Hurricane Center's contemporary compilation of tropical cyclones that "may have" caused at least 25 fatalities.[25] The storm grounded the schooner H. Wescott near Cape Fear.[24]

Gales were reported from Savannah, Georgia, to Wilmington, North Carolina.[19][26] Near Halifax, North Carolina, the winds toppled a railroad bridge about 450 ft (140 m) long and 60 ft (20 m) high.[24] The storm also ravaged farmland in the area, destroying crops, fences, trees, and structures, and injuring several people.[27] Much damage was reported in the Raleigh area,[28] and many trees in New Bern suffered at least some limb breakage; several large trees were fully uprooted. The local corn crop—already diminished from the July hurricane—was judged completely lost, though property damage was negligible. Offshore winds from the storm created a negative storm surge on the Neuse River, leaving docks dry for a time.[29] Torrential rains over a large area from Georgia to Virginia triggered severe river flooding.[30] The Dan River, which flows through North Carolina and Virginia, swelled 20 ft (6 m), amplified to 40 ft (12 m) above normal in narrow channels.[12][26] In the Carolinas, mills, dams, and roads were washed out, and losses in central North Carolina alone totaled an estimated $7 million.[22]

Gale-force winds lashed the tidewater region of Virginia in what was considered the worst storm on the lower Chesapeake Bay since the 1821 Norfolk and Long Island hurricane.[19] A ship called the Osceola lost its wheelhouse to the winds, while onshore, the storm razed crops and a few small structures such as barns and outhouses.[31] Affecting many of the same areas as the July hurricane, the cyclone downed trees in and around Baltimore and caused street flooding in Washington, D.C., where a railroad bridge was swept away.[19][32] The storm began to influence the weather at Philadelphia on the night of August 24. Strong winds out of the north and northeast at Philadelphia and Newark, New Jersey, suggest the center moved off the New Jersey coast and reemerged into the Atlantic. In addition to the gales, more than 3 in (75 mm) of rain fell on Newark on August 25.[19]
1849 railroad map of New England—click to enlarge

Winds at New London, Connecticut, and Providence, Rhode Island, veered from southeast to south, then west, so the storm center likely tracked somewhere over Connecticut. The storm adversely affected shipping on the Long Island Sound, and heavy rain fell across much of New England.[19] Fort Trumbull recorded 4.43 in (113 mm) of rain, while 2.5 in (64 mm) fell at Providence;[26] the deluge triggered flash flooding, though few details are known about the extent of the damage.[23]
Early September

The third and final widely documented hurricane to affect the U.S. East Coast in 1850 remained predominately offshore, but still impacted ships and coastal cities on September 7 and 8. A vessel about 140 mi (230 km) east of Atlantic City, New Jersey, intercepted the hurricane's center and recorded a pressure of 988 mbar (29.18 inHg) on the night of September 7. Numerous ships near the Delaware coast were stricken. Gusty winds snapped tree branches in New York City, while Newark received 2.6 in (66 mm) of rain as the hurricane brushed the region. The system probably continued toward the northeast, passing south of Nantucket, Massachusetts. There, gale-force winds initially blew out of the southeast before shifting to north midday on September 8. Similarly, Cape Cod experienced blustery conditions accompanied by heavy rainfall, though damage in eastern New England was generally inconsequential. Providence, Rhode Island, received 2 in (51 mm) of rain.[33]

The storm later affected the Canadian Maritimes,[34] causing heavy disruption in Nova Scotia. Downed telegraph wires in the region delayed damage reports until repairs were completed.[33] The cyclone "undoubtedly caused great loss of property and lives along the coast", according to a report from the telegraph office at Halifax.[1]
Other storms

A strong squall swept across Matagorda Bay in southeastern Texas on June 27. High winds ripped a ship from its anchor and drove it aground, and at least one other vessel suffered structural damage. Although it is included in the Weather Prediction Center's publication, Texas Hurricane History, little is known about the nature of the storm.[35]

Shipping data indicates a hurricane formed near Cape Verde on September 2 and tracked northward into the northeastern Atlantic over the next week. Andrés Poey listed this system as two distinct cyclones, later confirmed by Chenoweth (2006) to be a single storm.[3]

A final hurricane is believed to have existed over the central Atlantic in mid-October, moving from near 24.5°N, 47°W to 25.5°N, 41°W over the course of four days.[3]

Author Kazuo Ishiguro has hit back at accusations of genre-based snobbery surrounding his new novel The Buried Giant, which is set in a semi-mythical Britain inhabited by ogres, pixies and dragons.

At a Guardian event held at the Royal Institution in London on Sunday, Ishiguro said that veteran author Ursula K. Le Guin was “a little bit hasty in nominating me as the latest enemy for her own agenda,” after she had written a blog post accusing him of “despising” the fantasy genre.

“I think she wants me to be the new Margaret Atwood,” he said, referring to the criticism the Canadian author and poet has received from Le Guin for distinguishing her writing as “speculative fiction” and for saying science fiction was about “talking squids in outer space”.

“If there is some sort of battle line being drawn for and against ogres and pixies appearing in books, I am on the side of ogres and pixies,” he said. “I had no idea this was going to be such an issue. Everything I read about [The Buried Giant], it’s all ‘Oh, he’s got a dragon in his book’ or ‘I so liked his previous books but I don’t know if I’ll like this one’.

“[Le Guin]’s entitled to like my book or not like my book, but as far as I am concerned, she’s got the wrong person. I am on the side of the pixies and the dragons.”

In a recent interview with the New York Times, Ishiguro voiced his concerns about how readers would receive his new novel, which is his first in a decade. “Will readers follow me into this?” he asked. “Will they understand what I’m trying to do, or will they be prejudiced against the surface elements? Are they going to say this is fantasy?”

Le Guin quickly responded in a sharply worded blog post: “Well, yes, they probably will. Why not? It appears that the author takes the word for an insult.

“No writer can successfully use the ‘surface elements’ of a literary genre — far less its profound capacities — for a serious purpose, while despising it to the point of fearing identification with it,” she wrote. She went on to say she found reading The Buried Giant “painful”. “It was like watching a man falling from a high wire while he shouts to the audience, ‘Are they going say I’m a tight-rope walker?’”
Advertisement

Ishiguro compared the reception of his new novel to his 2005 dystopian parable Never Let Me Go, which had critics and readers alike debating its genre classification. “I think genre rules should be porous, if not nonexistent. All the debate around Never Let Me Go was, ‘is it sci-fi or is it not?’”

He said The Buried Giant’s fantasy setting served as a neutral environment to explore the idea of collective memory and how societies heal after atrocities by forgetting the past. He revealed that he considered Bosnia, America and post-second world war Japan and France as potential settings, but worried that sort of a recent historical scenario would make the story too political. “I always feel the pull of the metaphorical landscape, I am not a straightforward realist,” he said. “As far as I am concerned, I am trying to make a universal statement.”

Ishiguro said he was excited about “the younger generation of writers” using traditional science fiction tropes, such as dystopian settings and alternate realities, “with relish”. “I think any stigma around sci-fi and fantasy is fading,” he said, naming the author David Mitchell as having found success within the genre.

Mitchell himself appeared in Ishiguro’s New York Times interview, telling the newspaper by email that he hoped The Buried Giant would “de-stigmatise” fantasy. “Fantasy plus literary fiction can achieve things that frank blank realism can’t,” Mitchell wrote. “Bending the laws of what we call reality in a novel doesn’t necessarily lead to elves saying ‘Make haste! These woods will be swarming with orcs by nightfall.’”

In response to an audience question, Ishiguro – a screenwriter as well as a novelist – compared The Buried Giant to Guillermo del Toro’s film Pan’s Labyrinth in its use of fantastical tropes as a means of distraction from realities too painful to face. He also confirmed that Hollywood heavyweight Scott Rudin had optioned the film rights for The Buried Giant and said his ideal cast would include Gary Cooper and Betty Davis playing the lead couple and James Stewart as the aging Arthurian knight Sir Gawain.



Following in the footsteps of the hit 70s version of Poldark is no easy feat. Around 15 million viewers regularly tuned in to the BBC 40 years ago to see the adventures of the brooding 18th century Cornishman Ross Poldark and his servant Demelza and it made stars of the leads, Robin Ellis and Angharad Rees.

Eleanor Tomlinson, who plays ­Demelza in the forthcoming new ­adaptation of Winston Graham’s books, has said she is “nervous” about the reaction, and The Hobbit actor, Aidan Turner, who plays the eponymous hero, was told by his mother he had “better not mess this up”.

But its writer Debbie Horsfield is more sanguine. “I didn’t feel under any ­pressure about the 1970s adaptation. If I was under any pressure it was to do ­justice to the books.” Her approach was to concentrate on Graham’s novels, helped by the fact she had never seen the earlier drama.

“I felt no pressure at all because my source is the book not any previous ­versions, the same as if I’d done an adaptation of Pride and Prejudice. The source is what I felt I had to do a good job on. I didn’t think at all about any previous adaptation.” It was only after she had written five episodes of her Poldark that she allowed herself to look at the other one.

“It was really interesting because I could see why everybody had loved it in the 1970s. There are some fantastic ­performances. But I was also interested in some of the choices that had been made because they had diverged from the book quite considerably in some areas.”
Poldark writer Debbie Horsfield with actor Heida Reed
Facebook Twitter Pinterest
Poldark writer Debbie Horsfield with actor Heida Reed. Photograph: BBC

Andrew Davies – whose 1995 BBC version of Pride and Prejudice starring Colin Firth is still seen as a seminal version – says: “Every adaptation has to be one that reflects the time in which it was written, as the book itself does.” While he is “very proud” of his Pride and Prejudice, he thinks that even that will “eventually start looking old-fashioned”. He created a new take on Boris Pasternak’s Doctor Zhivago for ITV in 2002 and admitted it was hard to get David Lean’s film out of his head. While he says “it’s really difficult” to put away images from previous ­versions, “you just have to hope that the book offers you the chance of a different interpretation”.
Advertisement

Filming has started on Davies’s latest project – an adaptation of Tolstoy’s War and Peace, which was dramatised by the BBC in 1972.

Davies thinks the way to follow a previous successful version is “just try and have a fresh reading of the book, especially with classics. Every time we read them with a gap of years we read them as a slightly different person and in context … to our own times”.

That perhaps helps explain why Poldark producer Mammoth wanted Horsfield – who is renowned for her contemporary dramas such as The Riff Raff Element and Sex, Chips & Rock ‘n’ Roll – on board. Although the 70s series looms large, Horsfield says she was more interested in the fact that ­Graham’s novels are, “a slice of history, so I wanted to make sure I did justice to that really”.

Her storytelling skills and her English literature degree helped her, plus the fact that, although Poldark is set more than 200 years ago, “human beings don’t really change ... the needs are the same – love, companionship etc”.

She liaised with a historian and the production team went to great lengths to ensure historical accuracy. From the rotten state of some characters’ teeth to faithfully recreating an 18th century high street, the attention to detail was “amazing”, says Horsfield.

She acknowledges that nowadays with costume dramas such as ­Downton Abbey or Wolf Hall: “There’s more ­scrutiny. The internet has enabled ­anyone to look up what the reality was then.”

The new Poldark features Turner in a naked swimming scene, dubbed his Mr Darcy moment after the Pride and Prejudice lake scene where Firth appears in a wet shirt and breeches.

Davies reckons that while the 1970s Poldark was more about Demelza and Rees, the new one will be more about Ross and Turner: “She seemed to be the one that everyone talked about rather than Poldark but this time it seems to be about Ross Poldark.”

Eight episodes have been made, based on the first two of Graham’s ­novels, and the BBC hopes to make more. Horsfield tentatively says she is writing some more in preparation should it be recommissioned but does not want to jinx things.

She knows that it will not please ­everybody: “It’s a much-loved book. Fans of the book will have very ­specific images in their head of the key ­characters and nothing will match up to those. And we accept that.

“And there will be people who’ve never read the books or heard of the 1970s adaptation so they’re coming to it completely fresh. Even if I write ­something original it’s never going to please everybody.”



Björk was never going to find it easy, you must imagine, to play her first concert of songs from her brokenhearted new album Vulnicura. The struggle of performing such naked and personal music before thousands of people got compounded earlier this week, though, when her disastrous “retrospective” at the Museum of Modern Art elicited the worst reviews of her career. In the space of a few days, the concert became not just a debut of new material, but a comeback effort.

The Icelandic singer put on a brave face as she took to the stage of Carnegie Hall this weekend – insofar as you could make her face out beneath the spiky headdress, designed by Maiko Takeda, that engulfed her whole skull. She played the first six songs from Vulnicura, which chronicle her breakup with the artist Matthew Barney, as a single set and with evident difficulty. She frequently turned away from the audience, and on the short song History of Touches she couldn’t sing the words at all, replacing the lyrics with her trademark ah-sih-mah-lay-kah-ah-ah Björkish. Yet as she settled into the new material Björk opened up, and reaffirmed that her gifts have not slipped away.
Björk review – a strangely unambitious hotchpotch
Fairyland meets the Hard Rock Cafe in this exhibition dedicated to the singer’s unique career. There’s definitely no logic – and not enough history either
Read more

I remain ambivalent about Vulnicura. On the one hand, it’s her best album in 14 years, and its melodramatic heartbreak has a definite bravery. On the other, it lacks the care and precision that went into Homogenic and Vespertine, her greatest achievements, and the string arrangements in particular can at times descent into self-parody. Happily, Vulnicura sounds much better live than on record, and the chamber orchestra Alarm Will Sound beautifully rendered the hesitant lines of Stonemilker into lush, complex arrangements, over which Björk pleaded for “emotional respect”. Family, pared down from the cacophonous album version, became a gruelingly beautiful eulogy to lost domesticity. Black Lake, the album’s desolate 10-minute centerpiece, was a masterwork: a deliberate, overpowering crescendo from weakness to fury, which the percussionist Manu Delago punctuated with beats that sounded like landmine explosions. “You fear my limitless emotions,” Björk sang, and you can see why one might.
Advertisement

It has not been an easy week for anyone who appreciates Björk. The MoMA retrospective, billed as a groundbreaking exercise in presenting music in a museum, is nothing short of a fiasco – a jumbled, unreflective miscarriage that has elicited a universal critical drubbing. I called it weirdly unambitious, and my colleagues have turned to words such as “abominable,” “ludicrously infantilizing,” and “[a] self-inflicted wound” to describe the work of an artist we all admire, but the disapproval goes well beyond us critics. The shock has extended deep into the art world and the general public; the show was the talk of last week’s art fairs in New York, and Artforum’s indefatigable chronicler Linda Yablonsky called it “the most embarrassing exhibition at MoMA for as long as the living can recall”.

None of the disapproval, it’s worth pointing out, has anything to do with Björk’s status as a pop star. Deborah Solomon pointed out that MoMA has engaged with popular art forms, notably cinema, since the 1930s. Roberta Smith, the co-chief art critic of the New York Times, correctly insisted that Björk actually deserved a MoMA retrospective more than several fine artists whom the museum has given more space and more consideration. The disapproval has come, rather, from the lack of structure, research, and argument on the part of Klaus Biesenbach, the show’s curator – whose apathetic approach left Björk to flounder in a domain where she has no experience. At Carnegie Hall she fared much better, and her confidence showed, especially once she made it through the despondent Vulnicura songs. When she re-emerged after her six-song breakup set, the defensive headdress had come off. Björk threw herself into earlier material, recasting Come to Me with dark beats and imbuing I See Who You Are with bold, extended money notes.

Vulnicura may not be Björk’s best album, and this was not her finest concert. Her voice cracked on the highest note of The Pleasure is All Mine; she hit quasi-Wagnerian volume on the grand Mouth Mantra, but shrank at the climax of Undo. There were risible follow-the-bouncing-ball background graphics, complete with singalong lyrics, far inferior to the Ernst Haeckel fauna illustrations from her Vespertine tour. None of that mattered to the audience in her adopted hometown, keen to support her through painful music and a painful week. “If she sinks / I’m going down with her,” Björk bellowed on Quicksand, the beats syncopated and resounding. Her fans certainly felt that way, and I did too, by the end. Björk’s exhibition will be a stain on MoMA’s reputation for a long time, but four days after its opening Björk herself has commendably moved on.



Franz Schubert began work on his Ninth Symphony in 1825, the year after Beethoven unleashed his own great Ninth on the world. Schubert wasn’t shy to acknowledge the influence – he quotes the Ode to Joy in his last movement – and the Scottish Chamber Orchestra turned to earlier, more brusque Beethoven to set up this performance. If there’s poise, sweep and astute detail in Robin Ticciati’s conducting, the same tends to be true of the way he puts together a concert programme.

It was the violent, obsessive soundworld of Beethoven’s Coriolan Overture that unfolded and resolved, almost, in this blithe symphony. The tension seeded in the overture’s ferocious C minor opening burst into uproarious bloom in its C major close. The whispered pizzicatos that end Coriolan were chillingly inconclusive: the symphony’s fragile opening picked up where they left off.

Schubert’s Ninth spans about an hour, which Schumann called a “heavenly length”. Keeping afloat through the potential doldrums of motivic development is one of the great tests for any conductor. Ticciati applied the same thrust, lucidity and shading as he had in the overture, but in a span this epic I’m not sure it was enough. The darkest corners were left unprobed and the bright, crisp lines didn’t let us sink into the most outlandish tonal landscapes. It was a jovial, invigorating account, though never quite radical. Highlights were the earthy, elegant trio and the fearsome drive of the finale.

The buzz and gumption of Magnus Lindberg’s Violin Concerto completed the programme, with Renaud Capuçon as a frenetic, searching soloist. He hurtled around his violin, matching the dogged insistence of the Schubert and the brawn of the Beethoven. The SCO didn’t quite muster the work’s filmic expanses, but gave beautifully nimble, lissom support.



Tens of thousands of Israelis attended a rally in Tel Aviv’s Rabin Square on Saturday evening to call for the prime minster, Binyamin Netanyahu, to be replaced in elections later this month.

Organised under the banner, “Israel wants change” and dubbed an “anti-Netanyahu” event, the rally was headlined by former Mossad chief Meir Dagan, who told the crowd Israel is facing the worst leadership crisis in its history.

“We have a leader who fights only one campaign — the campaign for his own political survival … I am not a politician and not a public figure, and I came here this evening without personal aspirations, not looking for a position and without a grudge or bitterness,” he said. “To those who say we don’t have any alternative, as somebody who worked directly with three prime ministers: there is a better alternative,” Dagan said. He and former Israeli general Amiram Levine, who also addressed the rally, both used the word “apartheid” to describe the direction Israel is headed, 972 Magazine reported.

Israel police estimated around 40,000 attended the rally, while the organisers claimed the number was closer to 80,000.

Michal Kestan-Kedar, the widow of a lieutenant-colonel killed in last summer’s war in Gaza, pleaded with Israelis to vote for a leader who would not send soldiers into another war. “Yes, Mr prime minister, what’s important is life itself, but it’s impossible to speak all the time about Iran and to turn a blind eye to the bloody conflict with the Palestinians which costs us so much blood,” she said on the stage.

There were signs at the rally calling for “Revolution Now”, as well as posters for the Meretz and Zionist Union slates. Opposition leader and Zionist Union head Isaac Herzog’s name was not mentioned at the rally, in line with campaign election law.
Advertisement

The rally was organised by One Million Hands, a pro-two state, ad-hoc campaign founded by three Israelis, whose mission is to replace Israel’s current government. “We concluded that Netanyahu, the Likud is the real obstacle. We have to remove the main obstacle,” Dror Ben Ami, one of the campaign’s founders, told the Guardian. He said the campaign were very pleased with the turnout and hoped it would translate into votes on 17 March. “The aim of the rally was to get people there, to have a show of strength, and invigorate the Israeli public watching at home. To motivate them to vote, to not be apathetic. To vote for change.”

One Million Hands has been conducting an online campaign since elections were called in December to get 1 million Israelis to sign a petition to oust Netanyahu. So far they have around 260,000.

The Likud wrote the rally off as part of the left’s campaign to depose Netanyahu. “The [rally’s] goal is to replace the Likud government led by Netanyahu with a left government headed by Tzipi and Buji that will have the support of the Arab party.”

The latest polls show Netanyahu’s Likud and the Zionist Union neck and neck.

On Saturday 14 March, a rightwing pro-Netanyahu rally is planned in the same location, just three days before the election.

Officials with the Florida Department of Environmental Protection (DEP), the agency in charge of setting conservation policy and enforcing environmental laws in the state, issued directives in 2011 barring thousands of employees from using the phrases “climate change” and “global warming”, according to a bombshell report by the Florida Center for Investigative Reporting (FCIR).

The report ties the alleged policy, which is described as “unwritten”, to the election of Republican governor Rick Scott and his appointment of a new department director that year. Scott, who was re-elected last November, has declined to say whether he believes in climate change caused by human activity.

“I’m not a scientist,” he said in one appearance last May.

Scott’s office did not comment on Sunday, when contacted by the Guardian. A spokesperson for the governor told the FCIR team: “There’s no policy on this.”

The FCIR report was based on statements by multiple named former employees who worked in different DEP offices around Florida. The instruction not to refer to “climate change” came from agency supervisors as well as lawyers, according to the report.

“We were told not to use the terms ‘climate change’, ‘global warming’ or ‘sustainability’,” the report quotes Christopher Byrd, who was an attorney with the DEP’s Office of General Counsel in Tallahassee from 2008 to 2013, as saying. “That message was communicated to me and my colleagues by our superiors in the Office of General Counsel.”
Miami, the great world city, is drowning while the powers that be look away
Read more

“We were instructed by our regional administrator that we were no longer allowed to use the terms ‘global warming’ or ‘climate change’ or even ‘sea-level rise’,” said a second former DEP employee, Kristina Trotta. “Sea-level rise was to be referred to as ‘nuisance flooding’.”

According to the employees’ accounts, the ban left damaging holes in everything from educational material published by the agency to training programs to annual reports on the environment that could be used to set energy and business policy.

The 2014 national climate assessment for the US found an “imminent threat of increased inland flooding” in Florida due to climate change and called the state “uniquely vulnerable to sea level rise”.
 MOSCOW — Thought the Soviet Union was anti-American? Try today’s Russia.

After a year in which furious rhetoric has been pumped across Russian airwaves, anger toward the United States is at its worst since opinion polls began tracking it. From ordinary street vendors all the way up to the Kremlin, a wave of anti-U.S. bile has swept the country, surpassing any time since the Stalin era, observers say.

The indignation peaked after the assassination of Kremlin critic Boris Nemtsov, as conspiracy theories started to swirl — just a few hours after he was killed — that his death was a CIA plot to discredit Russia. (On Sunday, Russia charged two men from Chechnya, and detained three others, in connection with Nemtsov’s killing.)

There are drives to exchange Western-branded clothing for Russia’s red, blue and white. Efforts to replace Coke with Russian-made soft drinks. Fury over U.S. sanctions. And a passionate, conspiracy-laden fascination with the methods that Washington is supposedly using to foment unrest in Ukraine and Russia.

The anger is a challenge for U.S. policymakers seeking to reach out to a shrinking pool of friendly faces in Russia. And it is a marker of the limits of their ability to influence Russian decision-making after a year of sanctions. More than 80 percent of Russians now hold negative views of the United States, according to the independent Levada Center, a number that has more than doubled over the past year and that is by far the highest negative rating since the center started tracking those views in 1988.

Russians wait in line outside a McDonald's in 1991 in Moscow. The fast-food chain has had to emphasize its local ties after finding that it’s not immune from the anti-Western sentiment in the country. (AP)

Nemtsov’s assassination, the highest-profile political killing during Vladi­mir Putin’s 15 years in power, was yet another brutal strike against pro-Western forces in Russia. Nemtsov had long modeled himself on Western politicians and amassed a long list of enemies who resented him for it.

The anti-Western anger stands to grow even stronger if President Obama decides to send lethal weaponry to the Ukrainian military, as he has been considering. The aim would be to “raise the cost” of any Russian intervention by making the Ukrainian response more lethal. But even some of Putin’s toughest critics say they cannot support that proposal, since the cost is the lives of their nation’s soldiers.

“The United States is experimenting geopolitically, using people like guinea pigs,” said Sergey Mikheev, director of the Kremlin-allied Center for Current Politics, on a popular talk show on the state-run First Channel last year. His accusations, drawn out by a host who said it was important to “know the enemy,” were typical of the rhetoric that fills Russian airwaves.

“They treat us all in the same way, threatening not only world stability but the existence of every human being on the planet,” Mikheev said.

Soviet rhetoric was officially anti-Western, but it couldn’t repress ordinary Russians’ passion for the Beatles nor their enthusiasm for getting news from jammed Voice of America broadcasts. Those positive feelings spilled over after the 1991 collapse of the Soviet Union.

But the list of perceived slights from the United States has long been building, particularly after the United States and NATO bombed Serbia, a Russian ally, in 1999. Then came the war in Iraq, NATO expansion and the Russian-Georgian conflict. Each time, there were smaller spikes of anti-American sentiment that receded as quickly as they were built.

Putin cranked up the volume after protest movements in late 2011 and 2012, which he blamed on the State Department. It wasn’t until last year, when the crisis started in Ukraine, that anti-Americanism spread even among those who once eagerly hopped on planes to Miami and Los Angeles.
Polling Russians on their foreign policy View Graphic

Fed by the powerful antagonism on Russian federal television channels, the main source of news for more than 90 percent of Russians, ordinary people started to feel more and more disillusioned. The anger seems different from the fast-receding jolts of the past, observers say, having spread faster and wider.

The years of perceived humiliations have “led to anti-Americanism at the grass-roots level, which did not exist before,” said Vladimir Pozner, a journalist who for decades was a prominent voice of the Soviet Union in the United States. More recently, he has to explain the United States inside Russia. “We don’t like the Americans, and it’s because they’re pushy, they think they’re unique and they have had no regard for anyone else.”

Anti-American measures quickly suffused the nation, ranging from the symbolic to the truly significant. Some coffee shops in Crimea stopped serving Americanos. Activists projected racially charged images of Obama eating a banana onto the side of the U.S. Embassy in Moscow. Russians cheerfully flocked to exchange Western-branded clothing for T-shirts with pictures of an Iskander missile launcher that said “Sanctions? Don’t make my Iskander laugh.”

“This anti-Western propaganda radically changed the atmosphere in the society,” said Lev Gudkov, the director of the Levada Center, the opinion polling firm. “It has become militarist.”

Many Russians tapped into a deep-rooted resentment that after modeling themselves on the West following the breakup of the Soviet Union, they had experienced only hardship and humiliation in return.

“Starting from about 1989, we completely reoriented toward the West. We looked at them as a future paradise. We expected that once we had done all that they demanded, we’d dance for them and they would finally hug and kiss us and we would merge in ecstasy,” said Evgeny Tarlo, a member of Russia’s upper house of parliament, on a Russian talk show last year. Instead, he said, the West has been trying to destroy Russia.

The anti-Americanism makes it harder for American culture to make inroads through its traditional means — soft-power routes such as movies, music and education. Last year, Russian policymakers ended a decades-old high school exchange program that offered their nation’s best and brightest the chance to spend semesters at U.S. schools. Few Western artists now perform on Russian soil.

Western diplomats also say privately that they find themselves frozen out of speaking engagements and other opportunities to explain their countries’ positions to Russian audiences. And Russians who work for local outposts of Western companies say their friends and neighbors increasingly question their patriotism.

A handful of business leaders have warned that Russia risks permanently stunting its own economic development with the angry self-isolation.

“I worry that the recent crisis might drive Russia into a certain historic confrontation, hampering the country's development in all spheres,” said former finance minister and Putin ally Alexey Kudrin in an interview with TASS.

But those are lonely voices amid the torrent of anti-Western fury.

“What the government knew was that it was very easy to cultivate anti-Western sentiments, and it was easy to consolidate Russian society around this propaganda,” said Maria Lipman, an independent Moscow-based political analyst who is working on a study of anti-Western attitudes.

Even McDonald’s, long an embodiment of Russian dreams about the West, was targeted for supposed health violations last fall. Some of its most prominent locations were forced to shut down temporarily. When they reopened, McDonald’s started an advertising campaign emphasizing its local ties and its 25-year history in Russia, downplaying the Golden Arches’ global significance as a bright beacon of America.

Last week, one McDonald’s billboard in the heart of Moscow read: “Made in Russia, for Russians.”

Read more:

Putin critic, Russian opposition leader Boris Nemtsov killed in Moscow

Before Nemtsov’s assassination, a year of demonization

Thousands march to remember slain Putin critic 

 By Erin Cunningham March 8 at 3:21 PM

BAGHDAD — Iraqi forces and pro-government militias have routed Islamic State fighters in two key areas near the city of Tikrit, officials said Sunday, one week after embarking on an ambitious offensive to retake one of the militants’ key strongholds.

Officials hailed the advances as significant progress in the battle to recapture Tikrit. But troops remained stuck outside the city Sunday, underscoring the difficulty of taking on Islamic State militants entrenched in urban areas.

Local television channels aired footage Sunday of pro-government militias entering the village of Abu Ajeel, east of Tikrit. Officials said the militias, recruited by the government to assist in the fight against the Islamic State, also secured the area of Dawr. Images from Dawr, which is south of Tikrit, broadcast on television showed empty streets and dun-colored homes damaged by the fighting.

[View: The military assault on Tikrit in pictures]

Iraqi forces “have entered Abu Ajeel and reached the center of Dawr, but the operations are ongoing,” said Ahmed al-Karim, head of the provincial council in Salahuddin, where Tikrit is located.

“It will still take days to completely liberate” the areas, he said. “There is resistance from [the Islamic State], but it is not at the level we expected.”

On March 1, Iraq’s government announced the start of the offensive to reclaim Tikrit, which the Islamic State seized in the summer as part of a sweep across northern Iraq. Many of the city’s residents have fled. Tikrit was the home town of former strongman Saddam Hussein and is populated mostly by Sunni Arabs.

In Dawr, which was home to top Hussein lieutenant Izzat Ibrahim Douri, Iraqi forces found dozens of booby-trapped cars and improvised explosives left behind by the militants, a local official said. Some Hussein-era officials are part of the Islamic State.

The Islamic State “controlled the area for more than nine months,” Iraqi lawmaker Dheaa al-Douri said of Dawr. “So it will take time to defuse the bombs and allow civilians to return.”

[Read: The Islamic State’s atrocities]

The lawmaker denied reports Sunday that a pro-government militia had kidnapped civilians who had stayed behind in Dawr. He said troops had evacuated the civilians to the nearby government-controlled city of Samarra.

Militias dominated by Iraq’s majority Shiites have spearheaded the Tikrit offensive, raising concerns about revenge attacks against local Sunnis suspected of collaborating with the Islamic State.

The well-armed militias, nominally controlled by the government and backed by Iran, have eclipsed the poorly trained Iraqi security forces on the battlefield.

As many as 30,000 Iraqi troops and militia fighters are participating in the offensive, officials say.

In footage aired from Abu Ajeel on Sunday, gunmen from the powerful Asaib Ahl al-Haq militia were shown leading the battle. In Dawr, fighters with the militia Kitaeb Hezbollah raised their flag over a mosque.

Security forces said they would move east to the area of al-Alam, where the Islamic State is still in control, before advancing on Tikrit.

“We imagined we would do [the operation] in less time, but the enemy has planted bombs everywhere,” Qais al-Ghazali, the head of Asaib Ahl al-Haq, said in a televised news conference Saturday. “But we changed our tactics” and are moving forward, he said.

The government has not given any casualty figure.

Mustafa Salim contributed to this report.

Erin Cunningham is an Egypt-based correspondent for The Post. She previously covered conflicts in the Middle East and Afghanistan for the Christian Science Monitor, GlobalPost and The National.

     Share on Facebook
      Share on Twitter

34
Comments

The Post Recommends

Map: The salary you need to buy a home in 27 U.S. cities

The most expensive and cheapest cities, and everything in between.

Will Clinton's experience be a liability?

Revelations about her foundation and private e-mails are casting a shadow on her tenure leading the State Department.

2 Nemtsov suspects detained in Russia, prompting skepticism

The identities of the suspects did little to answer lingering questions about a motive in last week’s assassination.

Trending on Social Media

The Apple Watch's beautiful face is also its fatal flaw

'House of Cards' is the worst show about American politics. Ever.

How low self-esteem is killing girls' academic success around the world

Russia's anti-American fever goes beyond the Soviet era's

Utilities wage campaign against rooftop solar

A wave of mostly white voters is reshaping the politics of D.C.
Discussion Policy
34 Comments
Mentioned in this story and want to comment? Learn more
Please Sign In to Comment

    All Comments
        Newest First 
    Pause live updates

Kuehn
5:15 AM GMT+0100
POTUS rocks! Iraqis take Tikrit! Neo-cons take umbrage.
LikeReplyShare
2
dead reckoning
4:47 AM GMT+0100
In many ways, we are still fighting the First World War in the Middle East. 
 
Here’s a link to a letter published in the Sunday Times (London) on August 22, 1920, and written by T. E. Lawrence: 
 
http://www.telstudies.org/writings/works/articles_... 
 
Here’s the first paragraph: 
 
“The people of England have been led in Mesopotamia into a trap from which it will be hard to escape with dignity and honour. They have been tricked into it by a steady withholding of information. The Bagdad communiqués are belated, insincere, incomplete. Things have been far worse than we have been told, our administration more bloody and inefficient than the public knows. It is a disgrace to our imperial record, and may soon be too inflamed for any ordinary cure. We are to-day not far from a disaster.” 
 
And here’s a little ditty I wrote to commemorate the 98th anniversary of the signing (in secret) of the Sykes – Picot Agreement, concluded on May 16, 1916: 
 
A Piccadilly Circus, 1916  
 
When Picot met Sykes, and drew the lines, 
Of the modern Middle East, 
They counted on the Ottoman demise, 
To grab what they soon would fleece.  
 
Sykes told his friend, “You take Damascus,” 
With desert both dry and mean,  
Whilst we take Tigris and Euphrates, 
And the oil that lies between. 
 
They informed the Tsar, who didn’t wince, 
He was overthrown in a year,  
Their secret treaty revealed,  
The Arabs’ fate now sealed,  
We’ve been cleaning our mess ever since! 
 
Cheers  
 
See More
LikeReplyShare
1
swami-1947
3:58 AM GMT+0100
Is Israel who most of our lawmakers are beholden to, helping in this fight against ISIS? Or just trying to attack Iran which is actually putting boots on the ground against ISIS?
LikeReplyShare
1
tdstds
3:47 AM GMT+0100
 
Iran will soon control Iraq. 
 
Thank you, Mr. President. 
 
"We are leaving behind a sovereign, stable, and self-reliant Iraq." 
 
-- B. Obama, 2011. 
 
LikeReplyShare
DavidinCambridge
4:29 AM GMT+0100
If only we had a strong, resolute, Sunni leader in Iraq like Saddam Hussein who could balance Iran's power in the region.
LikeReply
3
Tommy Turk
8:39 AM GMT+0100
What business is it of yours who controls Iraq?
LikeReply
Avoid the nut jobs
2:57 AM GMT+0100
I know this is tiresome for the neocons but damn that W Bush sure created a mess getting Saddam out of there. Left a huge vacuum for Iran to exploit!! Good job W, Dumsfeld, Bremmer and Cheney...
LikeReplyShare
5
More

Get Today's Headlines

Daily updates delivered just for you.



DESNA, Ukraine — In a military training class north of Kiev late last month, volunteer ­instructor Viktor Mosgovoi led 30 would-be officers through hours of jumps, breathing exercises and group massages — Ukraine’s first mandatory psychological training for recruits.

“How do you feel? You feel uplifted!” Mosgovoi drilled the group of men in heavy boots and fatigues. Most of them followed along with blank looks or smirks on their faces. A few erupted into giggles. “Sing a song about what you see,” Mosgovoi suggested as a way to beat the battlefield blues. “And don’t drink.”

In nearly a quarter-century of independence, Ukraine’s military has seen so little combat that the country’s defense minister estimated the nation had only 6,000 battle-ready troops a year ago. Over the past 10 months, the Ukrainian army has drafted almost 70,000 soldiers in a war against pro-Russian separatists in the eastern part of the country. And most of the fighting has been carried out by recruits and volunteers with no prior combat experience.

Since the hostilities began, Kiev has scrambled to train tens of thousands of soldiers on how to fire weapons, take orders and internalize what commanders and enlistees refer to as a patriotic call to arms. But despite continued warnings from inside and outside the country about the war’s mental toll, it was not until the latest mobilization, which began a few weeks ago, that Ukraine ordered new recruits to go through a short psychological training course. It is run by a battalion of hastily retrained, unpaid civilian professionals.

“It’s all volunteers. Unfortunately, the government doesn’t support any of this,” said ­Valentina Neikova-Mohova, a volunteer crisis psychologist who also works with returning soldiers exhibiting signs of post-traumatic stress and other related disorders. “We lack the military specialists. We lack experience in this field.”

Neikova-Mohova is one of thousands of psychologists who offered their services, just as other civilians provided money, food and arms to a sorely under-supplied military when the fighting began.

But with no post-Soviet combat experience, and a military structure that officials say was intentionally wizened under years of pro-Russian leadership, very few people had any practical experience with war trauma.

“We practically do not have military psychology in this country,” said Elena Stupak, 46, who founded the Psychological Crisis Center — a group that began by working with civilians stricken by the violence during demonstrations on Kiev’s Independence Square last year. As some of those civilians moved eastward, making up the pro-Kiev volunteer battalions that fought alongside the military last summer, those in her organization began to focus on mental fitness in wartime, looking to international experts for advice, taking online courses and sharing what they learned with other volunteers as quickly as they could grasp the new information.

“Everyone is trying to do something,” Stupak said, explaining how newly minted psychology graduates with almost no field experience were being prepped to train soldiers and visit them on the battlefield. “It’s a very hot topic, and a lot of people are trying to get involved. But unfortunately, to do it right, we need time.”

There has been little time, however, as Ukraine’s attention has shifted from the battlefield to the negotiating room amid hopes for a peace agreement to alleviate the death toll from the conflict, which has claimed more than 6,000 lives.

For soldiers emerging from demoralizing setbacks, such as when troops were surrounded and forced to retreat in Ilovaysk last summer and Debaltseve just last month, the mental stress is one of the first things they talk about, especially when asked what advice they would give new recruits.

“If they were serving in the army before, they will be ready — potentially,” said infantryman Grigory Korumchak, 25, nursing a concussion in the hallway of a hospital in Artemivsk last month, fresh from fighting in Debaltseve. “If they are just coming right away though,” he added, his head shaking, “psychologically, they won’t be ready.”

“Your task in war is to survive,” said Pavel Kovalsk, 24, in the same hospital, his voice starting to break and his leg beginning to shake. “The physical wounds will heal; those just need time. But other wounds, they will remain.”

Before the war, few Ukrainian men had ever heard of post-traumatic stress disorder, psychological shock or mental trauma — or would openly discuss such afflictions.

“I had never heard of such a syndrome,” said Oleksandr Kazbanov, 39, a soldier who was eventually diagnosed with PTSD after returning from the battlefield with a concussion and a spinal injury last summer. He described headaches, sleeplessness, partial amnesia, aggression, acting like a loner — and the acute sensation that no one else around him knew what was wrong, either. He is now one of Neikova-Mohova’s patients.

He knew when he signed up that he might get killed or wounded, he said. “But not this.”

Volunteers are trying to use the example of soldiers like Kazbanov — who signed up before volunteer squads of psychologists started testing their palliative and preventive services with willing military units — to impress upon the newest recruits why they should take seriously the six to eight hours of mental health instruction they get as part of their month-long training course.

“If I went into the street and told people to do these exercises, it would be quite weird,” said Vasily Kalashikuh, a 43-year-old judge with no army experience who was drafted as an officer after Mosgovoi’s class. “But the knowledge is quite interesting.”

Not everyone is as impressed, however, with the quality of the instruction.

“We had much better training from Canadian instructors in Lviv,” Aleksandr Malatyuk, 28, said of Mosgovoi’s class, recalling his time as a paratrooper in the Ukrainian army — a special forces division that receives specialized training, he explained, including mental health. “They know more because they know the realities of war much better.”

Officials say the Defense Ministry is building an in-house program of paid psychologists. But many volunteers express doubts. The pay is so little, they say, that no experienced psychologist would take the job — even though some are already devoting 20 volunteer hours a week to the cause.

“We can’t do it in just a month or two or three,” Sergey Gryluk, a colonel with the Ukrainian military’s social-psychological center, said of the ministry’s efforts. Convincing the commanders that such counselors will improve and not interfere with the war effort has taken some work, he admitted, though he is optimistic that the situation is changing.

“We never had such an experience before — and now we have a war going on,” Gryluk said. “For that, we will find the weaponry. The main thing is to prepare people mentally.”

Natalie Gryvnyak contributed
to this report.

Read more:

Ukrainian battalion’s soldiers recall desperate run to safety

Cease-fire in peril as rebels trap 5,000 Ukrainian troops

Rout has Ukraine pleading for peacekeepers
Karoun Demirjian is a reporting fellow in The Post's Moscow bureau. She previously served as the Washington Correspondent for the Las Vegas Sun, and reported for the Associated Press in Jerusalem and the Chicago Tribune in Chicago.

An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations, generally referred to by its shortened title The Wealth of Nations, is the magnum opus of the Scottish economist and moral philosopher Adam Smith. First published in 1776, the book offers one of the world's first collected descriptions of what builds nations' wealth and is today a fundamental work in classical economics. Through reflection over the economics at the beginning of the Industrial Revolution the book touches upon such broad topics as the division of labor, productivity, and free markets.

Contents

    1 History
        1.1 Publishing history
    2 Synopsis
        2.1 Book I: Of the Causes of Improvement in the productive Powers of Labour
        2.2 Book II: Of the Nature, Accumulation, and Employment of Stock
        2.3 Book III: Of the different Progress of Opulence in different Nations
        2.4 Book IV: Of Systems of political Economy
        2.5 Book V: Of the Revenue of the Sovereign or Commonwealth
    3 Reception and impact
        3.1 United States
    4 Two views of the "Wealth of Nations"
    5 Modern evaluations
    6 See also
    7 Notes
    8 References
    9 External links

History

The Wealth of Nations was published 9 March 1776, during the Scottish Enlightenment and the Scottish Agricultural Revolution.[1] It influenced a number of authors and economists, as well as governments and organizations. For example, Alexander Hamilton was influenced in part by The Wealth of Nations to write his Report on Manufactures, in which he argued against many of Smith's policies. Interestingly, Hamilton based much of this report on the ideas of Jean-Baptiste Colbert, and it was, in part, Colbert's ideas that Smith responded to with The Wealth of Nations.

Many other authors were influenced by the book and used it as a starting point in their own work, including Jean-Baptiste Say, David Ricardo, Thomas Malthus and, later, Ludwig von Mises. The Russian national poet Aleksandr Pushkin refers to The Wealth of Nations in his 1833 verse-novel Eugene Onegin.

The Wealth of Nations was the product of seventeen years of notes, and observation of conversation among economists of the time concerning economic and societal conditions during the beginning of the Industrial Revolution, and took Smith ten years to produce. The result, An Inquiry to the Wealth of Nations, was a treatise which sought to offer a practical application for reformed economic theory to replace the mercantilist and physiocratic economic theories that were becoming less relevant in the time of industrial progress and innovation. It provided the foundation for new economists, politicians, mathematicians, biologists, and thinkers of all fields to build upon. Irrespective of historical influence, The Wealth of Nations represented a clear shift in the field of economics, similar to Sir Isaac Newton's Principia Mathematica for physics, Antoine Lavoisier's Traité Élémentaire de Chimie for chemistry, or Charles Darwin's On the Origin of Species for biology.
Publishing history
Bust of Smith in the Adam Smith Theatre, Kirkcaldy

Five editions of The Wealth of Nations were published during Smith's lifetime: in 1776, 1778, 1784, 1786, and 1789. Numerous editions appeared after Smith's death in 1790. To better understand the evolution of the work under Smith's hand, a team led by Edwin Cannan collated the first five editions. The differences were published along with an edited sixth edition in 1904.[2] They found minor but numerous differences (including the addition of many footnotes) between the first and the second editions, both of which were published in two volumes. The differences between the second and third editions, however, are major: In 1784, Smith annexed these first two editions with the publication of Additions and Corrections to the First and Second Editions of Dr. Adam Smith’s Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations, and he also had published the three-volume third edition of the Wealth of Nations, which incorporated Additions and Corrections and, for the first time, an index. Among other things, the Additions and Corrections included entirely new sections. The fourth edition, published in 1786, had only slight differences from the third edition, and Smith himself says in the Advertisement at the beginning of the book, "I have made no alterations of any kind." Finally, Cannan notes only trivial differences between the fourth and fifth editions — a set of misprints being removed from the fourth and a different set of misprints being introduced.
Synopsis
Book I: Of the Causes of Improvement in the productive Powers of Labour

Of the Division of Labour: Division of labour has caused a greater increase in production than any other factor. This diversification is greatest for nations with more industry and improvement, and is responsible for "universal opulence" in those countries. Agriculture is less amenable than industry to division of labour; hence, rich nations are not so far ahead of poor nations in agriculture as in industry.

Of the Principle which gives Occasion to the Division of Labour: Division of labour arises not from innate wisdom, but from humans' propensity to barter. The apparent difference in natural talents between people is a result of specialisation, rather than any innate cause.

That the Division of Labour is Limited by the Extent of the Market: Limited opportunity for exchange discourages division of labour. Because "water-carriage" (i.e. transportation) extends the market, division of labour, with its improvements, comes earliest to cities near waterways. Civilization began around the highly navigable Mediterranean Sea.

Of the Origin and Use of Money: With division of labour, the produce of one's own labour can fill only a small part of one's needs. Different commodities have served as a common medium of exchange, but all nations have finally settled on metals, which are durable and divisible, for this purpose. Before coinage, people had to weigh and assay with each exchange, or risk "the grossest frauds and impositions." Thus nations began stamping metal, on one side only, to ascertain purity, or on all sides, to stipulate purity and amount. The quantity of real metal in coins has diminished, due to the "avarice and injustice of princes and sovereign states," enabling them to pay their debts in appearance only, and to the defraudment of creditors."

Of the Real and Nominal Price of Commodities, or of their Price in Labour, and their Price in Money: In the first two passages Smith gives two conflicting definitions of the relative value of a commodity. Ricardo responded to one of Smith's inconsistencies in the Preface of his "Principles":

    The writer, in combating received opinions, has found it necessary to advert more particularly to those passages in the writings of Adam Smith from which he sees reason to differ; but he hopes it will not, on that account, be suspected that he does not, in common with all those who acknowledge the importance of the science of Political Economy, participate in the admiration which the profound work of this celebrated author so justly excites.[3]

Adam Smith defines the value of commodities by the labour embedded and also by the labour a good commands. Ricardo agrees with the first definition:

"The real price of every thing," says Adam Smith,[4] "What every thing really costs to the man who wants to acquire it, is the toil and trouble of acquiring it. What every thing is really worth to the man who has acquired it, and who wants to dispose of it, or exchange it for something else, is the toil and trouble which it can save to himself, and which it can impose upon other people. That this is really the foundation of the exchangeable value of all things, excepting those which cannot be increased by human industry, is a doctrine of the utmost importance in political economy."[5]

For Ricardo, the value of reproducible commodities and services reflects the relative difficulties of production counted in labour units: direct labour plus the dated labour of the past embedded in inputs (capital) and corrected by interests. This differs from Smith's[4] second definition of value:

    "The value of any commodity ... is equal to the quantity of labour which it enables him to purchase or command. Labour, therefore, is the real measure of the exchangeable value of all commodities."

Ricardo[6] disagrees:

    "Adam Smith, who so accurately defined the original source of exchangeable value ... speaks of things being more or less valuable, in proportion as they will exchange for more or less of this standard measure. ... [N]ot the quantity of labour bestowed on the production of any object, but the quantity which it can command in the market: as if these were two equivalent expressions..."

Smith's second definition pleases neoclassical economists, who determine value by the utility that a commodity provides a person rather than cost of production as do classical economists.

Of the Component Parts of the Price of Commodities: Smith argues that the price of any product reflects wages, rent of land and "...profit of stock," which compensates the capitalist for risking his resources.

Of the Natural and Market Price of Commodities:

    "When the quantity of any commodity which is brought to market falls short of the effectual demand, all those who are willing to pay... cannot be supplied with the quantity which they want... Some of them will be willing to give more. A competition will begin among them, and the market price will rise... When the quantity brought to market exceeds the effectual demand, it cannot be all sold to those who are willing to pay the whole value of the rent, wages and profit, which must be paid in order to bring it thither... The market price will sink..."[7]

To paraphrase Smith, and the first part of this Chapter, when demand exceeds supply, the price goes up. When the supply exceeds demand, the price goes down.

He then goes on to comment on the different avenues that people can take to generate a larger profit than normal. Some of those include: finding a commodity that few others have that allows for a high profit, and being able to keep that secret; Finding a way to produce a unique commodity (The dyer who discovers a unique dye). He also states that the former usually has a short lifespan of high profitability, and the latter has a longer. He also notes that a monopoly is essentially the same as the dyers trade secret, and can thus lead to high profitability for a long time by keeping the supply below the effectual demand.

    "A monopoly granted either to an individual or to a trading company has the same effect as a secret in trade or manufactures. The monopolists, by keeping the market constantly understocked, by never fully supplying the effectual demand, sell their commodities much above the natural price, and raise their emoluments, whether they consist in wages or profit, greatly above their natural rate. The price of monopoly is upon every occasion the highest which can be got. The natural price, or the price of free competition, on the contrary, is the lowest which can be taken, not upon every occasion, indeed, but for any considerable time together. The one is upon every occasion the highest which can be squeezed out of the buyers, or which, it is supposed, they will consent to give: the other is the lowest which the sellers can commonly afford to take, and at the same time continue their business."[8]

Of the Wages of Labour: In this section, Smith describes how the wages of labour are dictated primarily by the competition among labourers and masters. When labourers bid against one another for limited opportunities for employment, the wages of labour collectively fall, whereas when employers compete against one another for limited supplies of labour, the wages of labour collectively rise. However, this process of competition is often circumvented by combinations among labourers and among masters. When labourers combine and no longer bid against one another, their wages rise, whereas when masters combine, wages fall. In Smith's day, organised labour was dealt with very harshly by the law.

Smith himself wrote about the "severity" of such laws against worker actions, and made a point to contrast the "clamour" of the "masters" against workers associations, while associations and collusions of the masters "are never heard by the people" though such actions are "always" and "everywhere" taking place:

    "We rarely hear, it has been said, of the combinations of masters, though frequently of those of workmen. But whoever imagines, upon this account, that masters rarely combine, is as ignorant of the world as of the subject. Masters are always and everywhere in a sort of tacit, but constant and uniform, combination, not to raise the wages of labour above their actual rate [...] Masters, too, sometimes enter into particular combinations to sink the wages of labour even below this rate. These are always conducted with the utmost silence and secrecy till the moment of execution; and when the workmen yield, as they sometimes do without resistance, though severely felt by them, they are never heard of by other people". In contrast, when workers combine, "the masters [...] never cease to call aloud for the assistance of the civil magistrate, and the rigorous execution of those laws which have been enacted with so much severity against the combination of servants, labourers, and journeymen."[9]

In societies where the amount of labour exceeds the amount of revenue available for waged labour, competition among workers is greater than the competition among employers, and wages fall. Inversely, where revenue is abundant, labour wages rise. Smith argues that, therefore, labour wages only rise as a result of greater revenue disposed to pay for labour. Smith thought labour the same as any other commodity in this respect:

    "the demand for men, like that for any other commodity, necessarily regulates the production of men; quickens it when it goes on too slowly, and stops it when it advances too fast. It is this demand which regulates and determines the state of propagation in all the different countries of the world, in North America, in Europe, and in China; which renders it rapidly progressive in the first, slow and gradual in the second, and altogether stationary in the last."[10]

However, the amount of revenue must increase constantly in proportion to the amount of labour for wages to remain high. Smith illustrates this by juxtaposing England with the North American colonies. In England, there is more revenue than in the colonies, but wages are lower, because more workers flock to new employment opportunities caused by the large amount of revenue— so workers eventually compete against each other as much as they did before. By contrast, as capital continues to flow to the colonial economies at least at the same rate that population increases to "fill out" this excess capital, wages there stay higher than in England.

Smith was highly concerned about the problems of poverty. He writes:

    "poverty, though it does not prevent the generation, is extremely unfavourable to the rearing of children [...] It is not uncommon [...] in the Highlands of Scotland for a mother who has borne twenty children not to have two alive [...] In some places one half the children born die before they are four years of age; in many places before they are seven; and in almost all places before they are nine or ten. This great mortality, however, will every where be found chiefly among the children of the common people, who cannot afford to tend them with the same care as those of better station."[11]

The only way to determine whether a man is rich or poor is to examine the amount of labour he can afford to purchase. "Labour is the real exchange for commodities".

Smith also describes the relation of cheap years and the production of manufactures versus the production in dear years. He argues that while some examples, such as the linen production in France, show a correlation, another example in Scotland shows the opposite. He concludes that there are too many variables to make any statement about this.

Of the Profits of Stock: In this chapter, Smith uses interest rates as an indicator of the profits of stock. This is because interest can only be paid with the profits of stock, and so creditors will be able to raise rates in proportion to the increase or decrease of the profits of their debtors.

Smith argues that the profits of stock are inversely proportional to the wages of labour, because as more money is spent compensating labour, there is less remaining for personal profit. It follows that, in societies where competition among labourers is greatest relative to competition among employers, profits will be much higher. Smith illustrates this by comparing interest rates in England and Scotland. In England, government laws against usury had kept maximum interest rates very low, but even the maximum rate was believed to be higher than the rate at which money was usually loaned. In Scotland, however, interest rates are much higher. This is the result of a greater proportion of capitalists in England, which offsets some competition among labourers and raises wages.

However, Smith notes that, curiously, interest rates in the colonies are also remarkably high (recall that, in the previous chapter, Smith described how wages in the colonies are higher than in England). Smith attributes this to the fact that, when an empire takes control of a colony, prices for a huge abundance of land and resources are extremely cheap. This allows capitalists to increase his profit, but simultaneously draws many capitalists to the colonies, increasing the wages of labour. As this is done, however, the profits of stock in the mother country rise (or at least cease to fall), as much of it has already flocked offshore.

Of Wages and Profit in the Different Employments of Labour and Stock: Smith repeatedly attacks groups of politically aligned individuals who attempt to use their collective influence to manipulate the government into doing their bidding. At the time, these were referred to as "factions," but are now more commonly called "special interests," a term that can comprise international bankers, corporate conglomerations, outright oligopolies, trade unions and other groups. Indeed, Smith had a particular distrust of the tradesman class. He felt that the members of this class, especially acting together within the guilds they want to form, could constitute a power block and manipulate the state into regulating for special interests against the general interest:

    "People of the same trade seldom meet together, even for merriment and diversion, but the conversation ends in a conspiracy against the public, or in some contrivance to raise prices. It is impossible indeed to prevent such meetings, by any law which either could be executed, or would be consistent with liberty and justice. But though the law cannot hinder people of the same trade from sometimes assembling together, it ought to do nothing to facilitate such assemblies; much less to render them necessary."[12]

Smith also argues against government subsidies of certain trades, because this will draw many more people to the trade than what would otherwise be normal, collectively lowering their wages.

Chapter 10, part ii, motivates an understanding of the idea of feudalism.

Of the Rent of the Land: Rent, considered as the price paid for the use of land, is naturally the highest the tenant can afford in the actual circumstances of the land. In adjusting lease terms, the landlord endeavours to leave him no greater share of the produce than what is sufficient to keep up the stock from which he furnishes the seed, pays the labour, and purchases and maintains the cattle and other instruments of husbandry, together with the ordinary profits of farming stock in the neighbourhood. This is evidently the smallest share with which the tenant can content himself without being a loser, and the landlord seldom means to leave him any more. Whatever part of the produce, or, what is the same thing, whatever part of its price, is over and above this share, he naturally endeavours to reserve to himself as the rent of his land, which is evidently the highest the tenant can afford to pay in the actual circumstances of the land. Sometimes, indeed, the liberality, more frequently the ignorance, of the landlord, makes him accept of somewhat less than this portion; and sometimes too, though more rarely, the ignorance of the tenant makes him undertake to pay somewhat more, or to content himself with somewhat less, than the ordinary profits of farming stock in the neighbourhood. This portion, however, may still be considered as the natural rent of land, or the rent for which it is naturally meant that land should for the most part be let.
Book II: Of the Nature, Accumulation, and Employment of Stock

Of the Division of Stock:

    When the stock which a man possesses is no more than sufficient to maintain him for a few days or a few weeks, he seldom thinks of deriving any revenue from it. He consumes it as sparingly as he can, and endeavours by his labour to acquire something which may supply its place before it be consumed altogether. His revenue is, in this case, derived from his labour only. This is the state of the greater part of the labouring poor in all countries.

    But when he possesses stock sufficient to maintain him for months or years, he naturally endeavours to derive a revenue from the greater part of it; reserving only so much for his immediate consumption as may maintain him till this revenue begins to come in. His whole stock, therefore, is distinguished into two parts. That part which, he expects, is to afford him this revenue, is called his capital.[13]

Of Money Considered as a particular Branch of the General Stock of the Society:

    "From references of the first book, that the price of the greater part of commodities resolves itself into three parts, of which one pays the wages of the labour, another the profits of the stock, and a third the rent of the land which had been employed in producing and bringing them to market: that there are, indeed, some commodities of which the price is made up of two of those parts only, the wages of labour, and the profits of stock: and a very few in which it consists altogether in one, the wages of labour: but that the price of every commodity necessarily resolves itself into some one, or other, or all of these three parts; every part of it which goes neither to rent nor to wages, being necessarily profit to somebody."

Of the Accumulation of Capital, or of Productive and Unproductive Labour:

    "One sort of labour adds to the value of the subject upon which it is bestowed: there is another which has no such effect. The former, as it produces a value, may be called productive; the latter, unproductive labour. Thus the labour of a manufacturer adds, generally, to the value of the materials which he works upon, that of his own maintenance, and of his master's profit. The labour of a menial servant, on the contrary, adds to the value of nothing."

Of Stock Lent at Interest:

    "The stock which is lent at interest is always considered as a capital by the lender. He expects that in due time it is to be restored to him, and that in the meantime the borrower is to pay him a certain annual rent for the use of it. The borrower may use it either as a capital, or as a stock reserved for immediate consumption. If he uses it as a capital, he employs it in the maintenance of productive labourers, who reproduce the value with a profit. He can, in this case, both restore the capital and pay the interest without alienating or encroaching upon any other source of revenue. If he uses it as a stock reserved for immediate consumption, he acts the part of a prodigal, and dissipates in the maintenance of the idle what was destined for the support of the industrious. He can, in this case, neither restore the capital nor pay the interest without either alienating or encroaching upon some other source of revenue, such as the property or the rent of land."
    The stock which is lent at interest is, no doubt, occasionally employed in both these ways, but in the former much more frequently than in the latter."

Book III: Of the different Progress of Opulence in different Nations

Of the Natural Progress of Opulence:

    "The great commerce of every civilised society is that carried on between the inhabitants of the town and those of the country. It consists in the exchange of crude for manufactured produce, either immediately, or by the intervention of money, or of some sort of paper which represents money. The country supplies the town with the means of subsistence and the materials of manufacture. The town repays this supply by sending back a part of the manufactured produce to the inhabitants of the country. The town, in which there neither is nor can be any reproduction of substances, may very properly be said to gain its whole wealth and subsistence from the country. We must not, however, upon this account, imagine that the gain of the town is the loss of the country. The gains of both are mutual and reciprocal, and the division of labour is in this, as in all other cases, advantageous to all the different persons employed in the various occupations into which it is subdivided."

Of the Discouragement of Agriculture: Chapter 2's long title is "Of the Discouragement of Agriculture in the Ancient State of Europe after the Fall of the Roman Empire".

    "When the German and Scythian nations overran the western provinces of the Roman empire, the confusions which followed so great a revolution lasted for several centuries. The rapine and violence which the barbarians exercised against the ancient inhabitants interrupted the commerce between the towns and the country. The towns were deserted, and the country was left uncultivated, and the western provinces of Europe, which had enjoyed a considerable degree of opulence under the Roman empire, sunk into the lowest state of poverty and barbarism. During the continuance of those confusions, the chiefs and principal leaders of those nations acquired or usurped to themselves the greater part of the lands of those countries. A great part of them was uncultivated; but no part of them, whether cultivated or uncultivated, was left without a proprietor. All of them were engrossed, and the greater part by a few great proprietors.
    This original engrossing of uncultivated lands, though a great, might have been but a transitory evil. They might soon have been divided again, and broke into small parcels either by succession or by alienation. The law of primogeniture hindered them from being divided by succession: the introduction of entails prevented their being broke into small parcels by alienation."

Of the Rise and Progress of Cities and Towns, after the Fall of the Roman Empire:

    "The inhabitants of cities and towns were, after the fall of the Roman empire, not more favoured than those of the country. They consisted, indeed, of a very different order of people from the first inhabitants of the ancient republics of Greece and Italy. These last were composed chiefly of the proprietors of lands, among whom the public territory was originally divided, and who found it convenient to build their houses in the neighbourhood of one another, and to surround them with a wall, for the sake of common defence. After the fall of the Roman empire, on the contrary, the proprietors of land seem generally to have lived in fortified castles on their own estates, and in the midst of their own tenants and dependants. The towns were chiefly inhabited by tradesmen and mechanics, who seem in those days to have been of servile, or very nearly of servile condition. The privileges which we find granted by ancient charters to the inhabitants of some of the principal towns in Europe sufficiently show what they were before those grants. The people to whom it is granted as a privilege that they might give away their own daughters in marriage without the consent of their lord, that upon their death their own children, and not their lord, should succeed to their goods, and that they might dispose of their own effects by will, must, before those grants, have been either altogether or very nearly in the same state of villanage with the occupiers of land in the country."

How the Commerce of the Towns Contributed to the Improvement of the Country: Smith often harshly criticised those who act purely out of self-interest and greed, and warns that,

    "...[a]ll for ourselves, and nothing for other people, seems, in every age of the world, to have been the vile maxim of the masters of mankind." (Book 3, Chapter 4)

Book IV: Of Systems of political Economy

Smith vigorously attacked the antiquated government restrictions he thought hindered industrial expansion. In fact, he attacked most forms of government interference in the economic process, including tariffs, arguing that this creates inefficiency and high prices in the long run. It is believed that this theory influenced government legislation in later years, especially during the 19th century.

Smith advocated a government that was active in sectors other than the economy. He advocated public education for poor adults, a judiciary, and a standing army—institutional systems not directly profitable for private industries.

Of the Principle of the Commercial or Mercantile System: The book has sometimes been described as a critique of mercantilism and a synthesis of the emerging economic thinking of Smith's time. Specifically, The Wealth of Nations attacks, inter alia, two major tenets of mercantilism:

    The idea that protectionist tariffs serve the economic interests of a nation (or indeed any purpose whatsoever) and
    The idea that large reserves of gold bullion or other precious metals are necessary for a country's economic success. This critique of mercantilism was later used by David Ricardo when he laid out his Theory of Comparative Advantage.

Of Restraints upon the Importation: Chapter 2's full title is "Of Restraints upon the Importation from Foreign Countries of such Goods as can be Produced at Home". The "invisible hand" is a frequently referenced theme from the book, although it is specifically mentioned only once.

    "As every individual, therefore, endeavours as much as he can both to employ his capital in the support of domestic industry, and so to direct that industry that its produce may be of the greatest value; every individual necessarily labours to render the annual revenue of the society as great as he can. He generally, indeed, neither intends to promote the public interest, nor knows how much he is promoting it. By preferring the support of domestic to that of foreign industry, he intends only his own security; and by directing that industry in such a manner as its produce may be of the greatest value, he intends only his own gain, and he is in this, as in many other cases, led by an invisible hand to promote an end which was no part of his intention. Nor is it always the worse for the society that it was no part of it. By pursuing his own interest he frequently promotes that of the society more effectually than when he really intends to promote it." (Book 4, Chapter 2)

The metaphor of the "invisible hand" has been widely used out of context. In the passage above Smith is referring to "the support of domestic industry" and contrasting that support with the importation of goods. Neoclassical economic theory has expanded the metaphor beyond the domestic/foreign manufacture argument to encompass nearly all aspects of economics.[14]

Of the extraordinary Restraints: Chapter 3's long title is "Of the extraordinary Restraints upon the Importation of Goods of almost all Kinds, from those Countries with which the Balance is supposed to be Disadvantageous".

Of Drawbacks: Merchants and manufacturers are not contented with the monopoly of the home market, but desire likewise the most extensive foreign sale for their goods. Their country has no jurisdiction in foreign nations, and therefore can seldom procure them any monopoly there. They are generally obliged, therefore, to content themselves with petitioning for certain encouragements to exportation.

Of these encouragements what are called Drawbacks seem to be the most reasonable. To allow the merchant to draw back upon exportation, either the whole or a part of whatever excise or inland duty is imposed upon domestic industry, can never occasion the exportation of a greater quantity of goods than what would have been exported had no duty been imposed. Such encouragements do not tend to turn towards any particular employment a greater share of the capital of the country than what would go to that employment of its own accord, but only to hinder the duty from driving away any part of that shares to other employments.

Of Bounties: Bounties upon exportation are, in Great Britain, frequently petitioned for, and sometimes granted to the produce of particular branches of domestic industry. By means of them our merchants and manufacturers, it is pretended, will be enabled to sell their goods as cheap, or cheaper than their rivals in the foreign market. A greater quantity, it is said, will thus be exported, and the balance of trade consequently turned more in favour of our own country. We cannot give our workmen a monopoly in the foreign as we have done in the home market. We cannot force foreigners to buy their goods as we have done our own countrymen. The next best expedient, it has been thought, therefore, is to pay them for buying. It is in this manner that the mercantile system proposes to enrich the whole country, and to put money into all our pockets by means of the balance of trade

Of Treaties of Commerce:

    "When a nation binds itself by treaty either to permit the entry of certain goods from one foreign country which it prohibits from all others, or to exempt the goods of one country from duties to which it subjects those of all others, the country, or at least the merchants and manufacturers of the country, whose commerce is so favoured, must necessarily derive great advantage from the treaty. Those merchants and manufacturers enjoy a sort of monopoly in the country which is so indulgent to them. That country becomes a market both more extensive and more advantageous for their goods: more extensive, because the goods of other nations being either excluded or subjected to heavier duties, it takes off a greater quantity of theirs: more advantageous, because the merchants of the favoured country, enjoying a sort of monopoly there, will often sell their goods for a better price than if exposed to the free competition of all other nations."
    Such treaties, however, though they may be advantageous to the merchants and manufacturers of the favoured, are necessarily disadvantageous to those of the favouring country. A monopoly is thus granted against them to a foreign nation; and they must frequently buy the foreign goods they have occasion for dearer than if the free competition of other nations was admitted.

Of Colonies:

Of the Motives for establishing new Colonies:

    "The interest which occasioned the first settlement of the different European colonies in America and the West Indies was not altogether so plain and distinct as that which directed the establishment of those of ancient Greece and Rome.
    All the different states of ancient Greece possessed, each of them, but a very small territory, and when the people in any one of them multiplied beyond what that territory could easily maintain, a part of them were sent in quest of a new habitation in some remote and distant part of the world; warlike neighbours surrounded them on all sides, rendering it difficult for any of them to enlarge their territory at home. The colonies of the Dorians resorted chiefly to Italy and Sicily, which, in the times preceding the foundation of Rome, were inhabited by barbarous and uncivilised nations: those of the Ionians and Eolians, the two other great tribes of the Greeks, to Asia Minor and the islands of the Egean Sea, of which the inhabitants seem at that time to have been pretty much in the same state as those of Sicily and Italy. The mother city, though she considered the colony as a child, at all times entitled to great favour and assistance, and owing in return much gratitude and respect, yet considered it as an emancipated child over whom she pretended to claim no direct authority or jurisdiction. The colony settled its own form of government, enacted its own laws, elected its own magistrates, and made peace or war with its neighbours as an independent state, which had no occasion to wait for the approbation or consent of the mother city. Nothing can be more plain and distinct than the interest which directed every such establishment."

Causes of Prosperity of new Colonies:

    "The colony of a civilised nation which takes possession either of a waste country, or of one so thinly inhabited that the natives easily give place to the new settlers, advances more rapidly to wealth and greatness than any other human society.
    The colonists carry out with them a knowledge of agriculture and of other useful arts superior to what can grow up of its own accord in the course of many centuries among savage and barbarous nations. They carry out with them, too, the habit of subordination, some notion of the regular government which takes place in their own country, of the system of laws which supports it, and of a regular administration of justice; and they naturally establish something of the same kind in the new settlement."

Of the Advantages which Europe has derived from the Discovery of America, and from that of a Passage to the East Indies by the Cape of Good Hope:

    "Such are the advantages which the colonies of America have derived from the policy of Europe. What are those which Europe has derived from the discovery and colonisation of America? Those advantages may be divided, first, into the general advantages which Europe, considered as one great country, has derived from those great events; and, secondly, into the particular advantages which each colonising country has derived from the colonies which particularly belong to it, in consequence of the authority or dominion which it exercises over them.:
    The general advantages which Europe, considered as one great country, has derived from the discovery and colonisation of America, consist, first, in the increase of its enjoyments; and, secondly, in the augmentation of its industry.
    The surplus produce of America, imported into Europe, furnishes the inhabitants of this great continent with a variety of commodities which they could not otherwise have possessed; some for conveniency and use, some for pleasure, and some for ornament, and thereby contributes to increase their enjoyments."

Conclusion of the Mercantile System: Smith's argument about the international political economy opposed the idea of Mercantilism. While the Mercantile System encouraged each country to hoard gold, while trying to grasp hegemony, Smith argued that free trade eventually makes all actors better off. This argument is the modern 'Free Trade' argument.

Of the Agricultural Systems: Chapter 9's long title is "Of the Agricultural Systems, or of those Systems of Political Economy, which Represent the Produce of Land, as either the Sole or the Principal, Source of the Revenue and Wealth of Every Country".

    "That system which represents the produce of land as the sole source of the revenue and wealth of every country has, so far as by that time, never been adopted by any nation, and it at present exists only in the speculations of a few men of great learning and ingenuity in France. It would not, surely, be worthwhile to examine at great length the errors of a system which never has done, and probably never will do, any harm in any part of the world."

Book V: Of the Revenue of the Sovereign or Commonwealth

Smith postulated four "maxims" of taxation: proportionality, transparency, convenience, and efficiency. Some economists interpret Smith's opposition to taxes on transfers of money, such as the Stamp Act, as opposition to capital gains taxes, which did not exist in the 18th century.[15] Other economists credit Smith as one of the first to advocate a progressive tax.[16][17] Smith wrote, "The necessaries of life occasion the great expense of the poor. They find it difficult to get food, and the greater part of their little revenue is spent in getting it. The luxuries and vanities of life occasion the principal expense of the rich, and a magnificent house embellishes and sets off to the best advantage all the other luxuries and vanities which they possess. A tax upon house-rents, therefore, would in general fall heaviest upon the rich; and in this sort of inequality there would not, perhaps, be anything very unreasonable. It is not very unreasonable that the rich should contribute to the public expense, not only in proportion to their revenue, but something more than in that proportion" Smith believed that an even "more proper" source of progressive taxation than property taxes was ground rent. Smith wrote that "nothing [could] be more reasonable" than a land value tax.

Of the Expenses of the Sovereign or Commonwealth: Smith uses this chapter to comment on the concept of taxation and expenditure by the state. On taxation Smith wrote,

    "The subjects of every state ought to contribute towards the support of the government, as nearly as possible, in proportion to their respective abilities; that is, in proportion to the revenue which they respectively enjoy under the protection of the state. The expense of government to the individuals of a great nation is like the expense of management to the joint tenants of a great estate, who are all obliged to contribute in proportion to their respective interests in the estate. In the observation or neglect of this maxim consists what is called the equality or inequality of taxation."

Smith advocates a tax naturally attached to the "abilities" and habits of each echelon of society.

For the lower echelon, Smith recognised the intellectually erosive effect that the otherwise beneficial division of labour can have on workers, what Marx, though he mainly opposes Smith, later named "alienation,"; therefore, Smith warns of the consequence of government failing to fulfill its proper role, which is to preserve against the innate tendency of human society to fall apart.

    ..."the understandings of the greater part of men are necessarily formed by their ordinary employments. The man whose whole life is spent in performing a few simple operations, of which the effects are perhaps always the same, or very nearly the same, has no occasion to exert his understanding or to exercise his invention in finding out expedients for removing difficulties which never occur. He naturally loses, therefore, the habit of such exertion, and generally becomes as stupid and ignorant as it is possible for a human creature to become. The torpor of his mind renders him not only incapable of relishing or bearing a part in any rational conversation, but of conceiving any generous, noble, or tender sentiment, and consequently of forming any just judgment concerning many even of the ordinary duties of private life... But in every improved and civilized society this is the state into which the laboring poor, that is, the great body of the people, must necessarily fall, unless government takes some pains to prevent it."[18]

Under Smith's model, government involvement in any area other than those stated above negatively impacts economic growth. This is because economic growth is determined by the needs of a free market and the entrepreneurial nature of private persons. A shortage of a product makes its price rise, and so stimulates producers to produce more and attracts new people to that line of production. An excess supply of a product (more of the product than people are willing to buy) drives prices down, and producers refocus energy and money to other areas where there is a need.[19]

Of the Sources of the General or Public Revenue of the Society: In his discussion of taxes in Book Five, Smith wrote:

    "The necessaries of life occasion the great expense of the poor. They find it difficult to get food, and the greater part of their little revenue is spent in getting it. The luxuries and vanities of life occasion the principal expense of the rich, and a magnificent house embellishes and sets off to the best advantage all the other luxuries and vanities which they possess. A tax upon house-rents, therefore, would in general fall heaviest upon the rich; and in this sort of inequality there would not, perhaps, be anything very unreasonable. It is not very unreasonable that the rich should contribute to the public expense, not only in proportion to their revenue, but something more than in that proportion."[20]

He also introduced the distinction between a direct tax, and by implication an indirect tax (although he did not use the word "indirect"):

    "Capitation taxes, so far as they are levied upon the lower ranks of people, are direct taxes upon the wages of labour, and are attended with all the inconveniences of such taxes."[21]

And further:

    "It is thus that a tax upon the necessaries of life operates exactly in the same manner as a direct tax upon the wages of labour."[22]

This term was later used in United States, Article I, Section 2, Clause 3 of the U.S. Constitution, and James Madison, who wrote much of the Constitution, is known to have read Smith's book.

Of War and Public Debts:

    "...when war comes [politicians] are both unwilling and unable to increase their [tax] revenue in proportion to the increase of their expense. They are unwilling for fear of offending the people, who, by so great and so sudden an increase of taxes, would soon be disgusted with the war [...] The facility of borrowing delivers them from the embarrassment [...] By means of borrowing they are enabled, with a very moderate increase of taxes, to raise, from year to year, money sufficient for carrying on the war, and by the practice of perpetually funding they are enabled, with the smallest possible increase of taxes [to pay the interest on the debt], to raise annually the largest possible sum of money [to fund the war].

    ...The return of peace, indeed, seldom relieves them from the greater part of the taxes imposed during the war. These are mortgaged for the interest of the debt contracted in order to carry it on."[23]

Smith then goes on to say that even if money was set aside from future revenues to pay for the debts of war, it seldom actually gets used to pay down the debt. Politicians are inclined to spend the money on some other scheme that will win the favour of their constituents. Hence, interest payments rise and war debts continue to grow larger, well beyond the end of the war.

Summing up, if governments can borrow without check, then they are more likely to wage war without check, and the costs of the war spending will burden future generations, since war debts are almost never repaid by the generations that incurred them.
Reception and impact

The first edition of the book sold out in six months.[24] The printer William Strahan wrote on 12 April 1776 that David Hume had said that The Wealth of Nations required too much thought to be as popular as Edward Gibbon's The History of the Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire. Strahan also wrote: "What you say of Mr. Gibbon's and Dr. Smith's book is exactly just. The former is the most popular work; but the sale of the latter, though not near so rapid, has been more than I could have expected from a work that requires much thought and reflection (qualities that do not abound among modern readers) to peruse to any purpose".[25] Gibbon wrote to Adam Ferguson on 1 April: "What an excellent work is that with which our common friend Mr. Adam Smith has enriched the public! An extensive science in a single book, and the most profound ideas expressed in the most perspicuous language".[26] The review of the book in the Annual Register was probably written by Whig MP Edmund Burke.[27]

Smith's biographer John Rae contends that The Wealth of Nations shaped government policy soon after it was published. In 1777 the Prime Minister, Lord North, in the first budget after the book was published, got the idea for two new taxes from the book: one on man-servants and the other on property sold at auction. The budget of 1778 introduced the inhabited house duty and the malt tax, both recommended by Smith. In 1779 Smith was consulted by politicians Henry Dundas and Lord Carlisle on the subject of giving Ireland free trade.[28]

The Wealth of Nations was first mentioned in Parliament by the Whig leader Charles James Fox on 11 November 1783: "There was a maxim laid down in an excellent book upon the Wealth of Nations which had been ridiculed for its simplicity, but which was indisputable as to its truth. In that book it was stated that the only way to become rich was to manage matters so as to make one's income exceed one's expenses. This maxim applied equally to an individual and to a nation. The proper line of conduct therefore was by a well-directed economy to retrench every current expense, and to make as large a saving during the peace as possible".[29] However Fox once told Charles Butler sometime after 1785 that he had never read the book and that "There is something in all these subjects which passes my comprehension; something so wide that I could never embrace them myself nor find any one who did".[30] In 1796 when Fox was dining with Lord Lauderdale, Lauderdale remarked that they knew nothing of political economy before Adam Smith wrote. "Pooh," replied Fox, "your Adam Smiths are nothing, but" (he added, turning to the company) "that is his love; we must spare him there". Lauderdale replied: "I think he is everything", to which Fox rejoined: "That is a great proof of your affection".[30] Fox also found Adam Smith "tedious" and believed that one half of The Wealth of Nations could be "omitted with much benefit to the subject".[31]

In an editorial of The Times on 3 August 1787, it was stated: "It is astonishing to consider, how few merchants are acquainted with Smith's Wealth of Nations, or Anderson's History of Commerce, which are certainly books that should be perused by every man who makes trade his pursuit".[32]

The Wealth of Nations was next mentioned in Parliament by Robert Thornton MP in 1787 to support the Commercial Treaty with France. In the same year George Dempster MP referenced it in the debate on the proposal to farm the post-horse duties and in 1788 by a Mr. Hussy on the Wool Exportation Bill.[29] In 1791 the English radical Thomas Paine wrote in his Rights of Man that "Had Mr. Burke possessed talents similar to the author ‘On the Wealth of Nations,’ he would have comprehended all the parts which enter into, and, by assemblage, form a constitution".[33] The Prime Minister, William Pitt, praised Smith in the House of Commons on 17 February 1792: "...an author of our own times now unfortunately no more (I mean the author of a celebrated treatise on the Wealth of Nations), whose extensive knowledge of detail, and depth of philosophical research will, I believe, furnish the best solution to every question connected with the history of commerce, or with the systems of political economy".[34] In the same year it was quoted by Samuel Whitbread MP and Fox (on the division of labour) in the debate on the armament against Russia and also by William Wilberforce in introducing his Bill against the slave trade. It was not mentioned in the House of Lords until 1793, by Lord Lansdowne and Lord Loughbourough. Lansdowne said: "With respect to French principles, as they had been denominated, those principles had been exported from us to France, and could not be said to have originated among the population of the latter country. The new principles of government founded on the abolition of the old feudal system were originally propagated among us by the Dean of Gloucester, Mr. Tucker, and had since been more generally inculcated by Dr. Smith in his work on the Wealth of Nations, which had been recommended as a book necessary for the information of youth by Mr. Dugald Stewart in his Elements of the Philosophy of the Human Mind". Loughborough replied that "in the works of Dean Tucker, Adam Smith, and Mr. Stewart, to which allusion had been made, no doctrines inimical to the principles of civil government, the morals or religion of mankind, were contained, and therefore to trace the errors of the French to these causes was manifestly fallacious".[35] On 16 May 1797 Pitt said in the debate on the suspension of cash payments by the Bank of England that Smith was "that great author" but his arguments "though always ingenious" were "sometimes injudicious".[36]

Sir John Mitford, the Solicitor-General, said on 22 December 1798 in speaking on cross-bills (a bill of exchange given in consideration of another bill) that Smith "in his Wealth of Nations, explains the nature and pernicious consequences of this practice with his usual perspicuity and philosophical accuracy".[37] On 5 December 1800 Lord Warwick said in a debate on the price of corn that:

    There was hardly any kind of property on which the law did not impose some restraints and regulations with regard to the sale of them, except that of provisions. This was probably done on the principles laid down by a celebrated and able writer, Doctor Adam Smith, who had maintained that every thing ought to be left to its own level. He knew something of that Gentleman, whose heart he knew was as sound as his head; and he was sure that had he lived to this day and beheld the novel state of wretchedness to which the country was now reduced—a state, which as the like had never occurred before, could never have entered into his mind; that Great Man would have reason to blush for some of the doctrines he had laid down. He would now have abundant opportunities of observing that all those artificial means of enhancing the price of provisions, which he had considered as no way mischievous, were practised at this time to a most alarming extent. He would see the Farmer keeping up his produce while the poor were labouring under all the miseries of want, and he would see Forestallers, Regraters, and all kinds of Middle-men making large profits upon it.[38]

Lord Grenville replied that "he must remind him, that so far from there having been any difference in the state of the Country when that great man lived, and the present times, his book was first published at a period, previous to which there had been two or three seasons of great dearth and distress; and during those seasons there were speculators without number, who raised an unfounded and unjust clamour against Forestallers and Regraters, and who proposed that a certain price should be fixed on every article: but all their plans were wisely rejected, and the Treatise on the Wealth of Nations, which came forward soon after, pointed out in the clearest light how absurd and futile they must have been".[38]

In 1800 the Anti-Jacobin Review criticised The Wealth of Nations and Robert Southey in 1812 in the Quarterly Review condemned The Wealth of Nations as a "tedious and hard-hearted book".[39]

In 1803 The Times argued against war with Spain: "She is our best customer; and by the gentle and peaceable stream of commerce, the treasures of the new world flow with greater certainty into English reservoirs, than it could do by the most successful warfare. They come in this way to support our manufactures, to encourage industry, to feed our poor, to pay taxes, to reward ingenuity, to diffuse riches among all classes of people. But for the full understanding of this beneficial circulation of wealth, we must refer to Dr. Adam Smith's incomparable Treatise on the Wealth of Nations".[40] In 1810 a correspondent writing under the pseudonym of Publicola included at the head of his letter Smith's line that "Exclusive Companies are nuisances in every respect" and called him "that learned writer".[41] In 1821 The Times quoted Smith's opinion that the interests of corn dealers and the people were the same.[42]

In 1826 the English radical William Cobbett criticised in his Rural Rides the political economists' hostility to the Poor Law: "Well, amidst all this suffering, there is one good thing; the Scotch political economy is blown to the devil, and the Edinburgh Review and Adam Smith along with it".[43]

The Radical MP Richard Cobden as a young man studied The Wealth of Nations; his copy is still in the library of his home at Dunford House and there are lively marginal notes on the places where Smith condemns British colonial policy. There are none on the passage about the invisible hand.[44] Cobden campaigned for free trade in his agitation against the Corn Laws. On 13 October 1843 Cobden quoted (accurately) Smith's protest against the "plain violation of the most sacred property" of every man derived from his labour.[45] On 8 May 1844 he cited Smith's opposition to slave labour[46] and on 3 July 1844 claimed that Smith had been misrepresentated by protectionists as a monopolist.[47] On 8 October 1849 Cobden claimed that he had "gone through the length and breadth of this country, with Adam Smith in my hand, to advocate the principles of Free Trade." He also said he had tried "to popularise to the people of this country, and of the Continent, those arguments with which Adam Smith, David Hume, Ricardo, and every man who has written on this subject, have demonstrated the funding system to be injurious to mankind, and unjust in principle".[48] Cobden believed it to be morally wrong to lend money to be spent on war. When The Times claimed the political economists were against Cobden on this, Cobden wrote on 16 October 1849: "I can quote Adam Smith whose authority is without appeal now in intellectual circles, it gives one the basis of science upon which to raise appeals to the moral feelings".[49] When in 1850 the Russian government attempted to raise a loan, ostensibly for the construction of a railway from St. Petersburg to Moscow, but actually to cover the deficit brought about by its war against Hungary, Cobden said on 18 January: "I take my stand on one of the strongest grounds in stating that Adam Smith and other great authorities on political economy are opposed to the very principle of such loans".[50] In 1863, during Cobden's dispute with The Times over its claims that his fellow Radical John Bright wanted to divide the land of the rich amongst the poor, Cobden read to a friend the passage in the Wealth of Nations which criticised primogeniture and entail. Cobden said that if Bright had been as plain-speaking as Smith, "how he would have been branded as an incendiary and Socialist".[51] On 23 November 1864 Cobden proclaimed: "If I were five-and-twenty or thirty, instead of, unhappily, twice that number of years, I would take Adam Smith in hand—I would not go beyond him, I would have no politics in it—I would take Adam Smith in hand, and I would have a League for free trade in Land just as we had a League for free trade in Corn. You will find just the same authority in Adam Smith for the one as for the other; and if it were only taken up as it must be taken up to succeed, not as a political, revolutionary, Radical, Chartist notion, but taken up on politico-economic grounds, the agitation would be certain to succeed".[52]

The Liberal statesman William Ewart Gladstone chaired the meeting of the Political Economy Club to celebrate the centenary of the publication of The Wealth of Nations.[53]

The Liberal historian Lord Acton believed that The Wealth of Nations gave a "scientific backbone to liberal sentiment"[54] and that it was the "classic English philosophy of history".[55]
United States

James Madison, in a speech given in Congress on 2 February 1791, cited The Wealth of Nations in opposing a national bank: "The principal disadvantages consisted in, 1st. banishing the precious metals, by substituting another medium to perform their office: This effect was inevitable. It was admitted by the most enlightened patrons of banks, particularly by Smith on the Wealth of Nations".[56] Thomas Jefferson, writing to John Norvell on 14 June 1807, claimed that on "the subjects of money & commerce, Smith's Wealth of Nations is the best book to be read, unless Say's Political Economy can be had, which treats the same subject on the same principles, but in a shorter compass & more lucid manner".[57]
Two views of the "Wealth of Nations"

In the Preface to his edition, Cannan shows that the major part of the "Wealth of Nations" follows Adam Smith’s earlier lectures, but that there are important additions due to his visit to France. These additions were so important for Smith that he puts them at the beginning of his work. For Cannan as a neoclassical economist they are superfluous and not the real Adam Smith: "These changes do not make so much real difference to Smith’s own work as might be supposed; the theory of distribution, though it appears in the title of Book I., is no essential part of the work and could easily be excised ... But to subsequent [classical] economics they were of fundamental importance. They settled the form of economic treatises for a century at least."[58]

The "Wealth of Nations" is therefore inhomogeneous and consists of the earlier elements of an individualistic strain in the tradition of Aristotle, Puffendorf and Hutcheson,[59] Smith’s teacher, – elements compatible with a neoclassical theory – and the classical theory Smith learned in France.

Smith’s classical message is what he states at the very beginning: the two ways to create the “Wealth of Nations”. First, make productive labour even more productive by enhancing markets to deepen the division of labour (moving the neoclassical production curve to the right); and second, use more labour productively instead of unproductively, i.e., produce more goods and services that are inputs to the next economic reproduction circle, as opposed to goods used up in final consumption. In the words of Adam Smith:

    "The annual labour of every nation is the fund which originally supplies it with all the necessaries and conveniences of life which it annually consumes ... . [T]his produce ... bears a greater or smaller proportion to the number of those who are to consume it ... .[B]ut this proportion must in every nation be regulated by two different circumstances;

    first, by the skill, dexterity, and judgment with which its labour is generally applied; and,
    secondly, by the proportion between the number of those who are employed in useful labour, and that of those who are not so employed [emphasis added]."[60]

Ricardo[61] repeats this in identical terms. Smith’s and the classical macro-economical distinction between productive and unproductive labour gives no sense within neoclassical micro-economics as any labour or idleness of a Homo oeconomicus maximises his micro-economic “utility” and is therefore productive.

For neoclassical economists Smith’s central message is the Invisible hand[62] mentioned deep in the books and seen as a proto-neoclassical statement of the neoclassical General equilibrium theory:

    "[E]very individual necessarily labours to render the annual revenue of the society as great as he can. He generally, indeed, neither intends to promote the public interest, nor knows how much he is promoting it. By preferring the support of domestic to that of foreign industry, he intends only his own security; and by directing that industry in such a manner as its produce may be of the greatest value, he intends only his own gain; and he is in this, as in many other cases, led by an invisible hand to promote an end which was no part of his intention.”[63]

This often quoted passage describes the unintentional consequences that come from individuals' pursuit of their "own gain" and security. Smith argued people prefer local industry and are biased against international trade. Ideally, he saw economics as characterised by small local economies interacting with each other and guided by the enlightened self-interest of individuals. This was a reaction against the practices of early transnational corporations (for example: the British East India Company and Muscovy Company), which were mostly unresponsive to local affairs and stewardship of resources. Though the argument is frequently used to justify free-trade policies, The Wealth of Nations was a rebuttal to the scale and effects of chartered monopoly. By positing—now famously—that "self-interest" promotes more just societies, he was prescribing to economies already heavily tilted against individual human agency. For instance, American colonists were permitted to grow cotton but not to manufacture with it. They had to sell cotton to England for processing, then buy it back as clothing. Smith felt opposing large multinational corporations (and the governments that support them), allowed individuals to direct industry "in such a manner as its produce may be of the greatest value." This value comes from the individual's self-interest and leads to a result that is "no part of his intention."[citation needed]
Modern evaluations
Bustling with work and activity, "The Wealth of the Nation" by Seymour Fogel is an interpretation of the theme of Social Security.

George Stigler attributes to Smith "the most important substantive proposition in all of economics" and foundation of resource-allocation theory. It is that, under competition, owners of resources (labor, land, and capital) will use them most profitably, resulting in an equal rate of return in equilibrium for all uses (adjusted for apparent differences arising from such factors as training, trust, hardship, and unemployment).[64] He also describes Smith's theorem that "the division of labour is limited by the extent of the market" as the "core of a theory of the functions of firm and industry" and a "fundamental principle of economic organisation."[65]

Paul Samuelson finds in Smith's pluralist use of supply and demand — as applied to wages, rents, and profit – a valid and valuable anticipation of the general equilibrium modelling of Walras a century later. Moreover, Smith's allowance for wage increases in the short and intermediate term from capital accumulation and invention added a realism missed later by Malthus, Ricardo, and Marx in their propounding a rigid subsistence-wage theory of labour supply.[66]

In noting the last words of the Wealth of Nations,

    If any of the provinces of the British empire cannot be made to contribute towards the support of the whole empire, it is surely time that Great Britain should free herself from the expence of defending those provinces in time of war, and of supporting any part of their civil or military establishments in time of peace, and endeavour to accommodate her future views and designs to the real mediocrity of her circumstances.[67]

Ronald Coase suggests that if Smith's earlier proposal of granting colonies representation in the British parliament proportional to their contributions to public revenues had been followed, "there would have been no 1776, ... America would now be ruling England, and we [in America] would be today celebrating Adam Smith not simply as the author of the Wealth of Nations, but hailing him as a founding father."[68]

Mark Blaug argues that it was Smith's achievement to shift the burden of proof against those maintaining that the pursuit of self-interest does not achieve social good. But he notes Smith's relevant attention to definite institutional arrangements and process as disciplining self-interest to widen the scope of the market, accumulate capital, and grow income.[69]

Libertarian theorist Murray Rothbard, however, disagrees, saying that Smith's influence has blinded economic historians to the writings and theories of economists prior to Smith. He also calls The Wealth of Nations "a huge, sprawling, inchoate, confused tome, rife with vagueness, ambiguity and deep inner contradictions."[70]

Economic anthropologist David Graeber argues that throughout antiquity, one can identify many different systems of credit and later monetary exchange, drawing evidence for his argument from historical and also ethnographical records, that the traditional explanation for the origins of monetary economies from primitive bartering systems, as laid out by Adam Smith, doesn't find empirical support.[71] The author argues that credit systems developed as means of account long before the advent of coinage around 600 BC, and can still be seen operating in non-monetary economies. The idea of barter, on the other hand, seems only to apply to limited exchanges between societies that had infrequent contact and often in a context of ritualized warfare, rendering its conceptualization among economists as a myth.[72] As an alternative explanation for the creation of economic life, the author suggests that it originally related to social currencies, closely related to non-market quotidian interactions among a community and based on the "everyday communism" that is based on mutual expectations and responsibilities among individuals. This type of economy is, then, contrasted with the moral foundations of exchange based on formal equality and reciprocity (but not necessarily leading to market relations) and hierarchy, based on clear inequalities that tend to crystallize in customs and castes[72]
See also

    Free Trade
    American School of Economics
    Austrian School of Economics Free Trade and Capitalism
    Classical economics
    New Keynesian economics
    Marginalism
    Neoclassical economics
    Political economy
    The Theory of Moral Sentiments (1759), Adam Smith's other classic
    The National Gain, a pamphlet by Finnish-Swedish economist and politician Anders Chydenius which preceded The Wealth of Nations and which had similar ideas.
    Wealth (economics)
    The invisible hand
    Mercantilism

Notes

See Smith, Adam (1776). "An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations" 1 (1 ed.). London: W. Strahan. Retrieved 2012-12-07., volume 2 via Google Books
An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations, by Adam Smith. London: Methuen and Co., Ltd., ed. Edwin Cannan, 1904. Fifth edition.
Ricardo, D., [1817], Principles of Political Economy and Taxation, vol. i, p. 6, in: Sraffa (ed.), 1951, The Works and Correspondence of David Ricardo, 10 vol. (1951– 55), Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Smith, A., 1976, The Wealth of Nations edited by R.H. Campbell and A.S. Skinner, The Glasgow edition of the Works and Correspondence of Adam Smith, vol. 2b, pp. 47.
Ricardo, D., [1817], Principles, vol. i, p. 13, idem.
Ricardo, D., [1817], Principles”, vol. i, p. 13-4, idem.
Smith (1776) Book I, Chapter 7, para 9
Smith (1776) Book I, Chapter 7, para 26
Wealth of Nations, Book I. Chap. viii
Smith (1776) I, 8, para 39
Smith (1776) I, 8, para 37.
Smith (1776) Book I, Chapter 10, para 82
Smith (1776) II, 1, paras 1-2.
Basu, Kaushik (2010). Beyond the Invisible Hand: Groundwork for a New Economics. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. ISBN 978-1-4008-3627-7.
Bartlett, Bruce (24 January 2001). "Adam Smith On Taxes". National Center for Policy Analysis. Retrieved 14 May 2008.[dead link]
Reich, Robert B. (26 April 1987). "Do Americans Still Believe In Sharing The Burden?". The Washington Post. p. d.01. Retrieved 14 May 2008.
Stein, Herbert (6 April 1994). "Board of Contributors: Remembering Adam Smith". Wall Street Journal (Eastern Edition).
Smith (1776) V, 1, para 178
R. Conteras, "How the Concept of Development Got Started" University of Iowa Center for International Finance and Development E-Book [1]
Adam Smith, An Inquiry into the Nature And Causes of the Wealth of Nations (1776). Book V, Chapter 2, Article I: Taxes upon the Rent of House.[2]
Adam Smith, An Inquiry into the Nature And Causes of the Wealth of Nations (1776). Book V, Chapter 2, Article IV: Capitation Taxes.[3]
Adam Smith, An Inquiry into the Nature And Causes of the Wealth of Nations (1776). Book V, Chapter 2, Article IV: Consumable commodities are either necessaries or luxuries.[4]
Adam Smith, An Inquiry into the Nature And Causes of the Wealth of Nations (1776). Book V, Chapter 3, Article III: Of Public Debts.[5]
John Rae, Life of Adam Smith (London: Macmillan & Co., 1895), p. 285.
Rae, pp. 285–286.
Rae, p. 287.
Rae, p. 286.
Rae, p. 294.
Rae, p. 290.
Rae, p. 289.
L. G. Mitchell, Charles James Fox (Penguin, 1997), p. 185.
The Times (3 August 1787), p. 2.
Thomas Paine, Rights of Man, Common Sense, and Other Political Writings (Oxford University Press, 1995), p. 126.
John Ehrman, The Younger Pitt. The Years of Acclaim (London: Constable, 1969), p. 267, n. 1.
Rae, p. 291.
John Ehrman, The Younger Pitt. The Consuming Struggle (London: Constable, 1996), p. 12.
The Times (24 December 1798), p. 4.
The Times (6 December 1800), p. 2.
J. J. Sack, From Jacobite to Conservative. Reaction and orthodoxy in Britain, c. 1760–1832 (Cambridge University Press, 2004), p. 182.
The Times (25 October 1803), p. 2.
The Times (8 February 1810), p. 2.
The Times (17 September 1821), p. 2.
William Cobbett, Rural Rides (Penguin, 2001), p. 335.
William D. Grampp, The Manchester School of Economics (London: Oxford University Press, 1960), p. 103.
John Bright and J. E. Thorold Rogers (eds.), Speeches on Questions of Public Policy by Richard Cobden, M.P. Volume I (London: T. Fisher Unwin, 1908), p. 45.
Bright and Thorold Rogers, Volume I, p. 92.
Bright and Thorold Rogers, Volume I, pp. 104–105.
John Bright and J. E. Thorold Rogers (eds.), Speeches on Questions of Public Policy by Richard Cobden, M.P. Volume II (London: T. Fisher Unwin, 1908), pp. 399–400.
Wendy Hinde, Richard Cobden. A Victorian Outsider (Yale University Press, 1987), p. 204.
Bright and Thorold Rogers, Volume II, p. 406.
Donald Read, Cobden and Bright. A Victorian Political Partnership (Edward Arnold, 1967), p. 189.
Bright and Thorold Rogers, Volume II, p. 493.
H. C. G. Matthew, Gladstone. 1875–1898 (Oxford University Press, 1995), p. 20.
G. E. Fasnacht, Acton's Political Philosophy. An Analysis (London: Hollis and Carter, 1952), p. 145.
Fasnacht, p. 241.
James Madison, Writings (The Library of America, 1999), p. 481.
Thomas Jefferson, Writings (The Library of America, 1984), p. 1176.
Cannan, Edwin (ed.), 1937, p. xxxix, Editor’s Introduction, pp. xxxviii–xli to: Adam Smith, "An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations", N. Y.: Random House.
"The learned will at once discern how much ... is taken from the writings of others, from Cicero and Aristotle, and to name no other moderns, from Puffendorf’s ... de officio hominis et civis" (Hutcheson, F., 1787, "A Short Introduction to Moral Philosophy", Dublin: McKenzie, p. vii.). In "System" (1755) Hutcheson’s begins stating: "The intention of moral philosophy is to direct men to that course of action which tends most effectually to promote their greatest happiness and perfection." (Hutcheson, F., 1755, "A system of moral philosophy", Glasgow: Foulis). And in "Inquiry" Hutcheson (1729, 180) explains: "That action is best, which procures the greatest Happiness for the greatest Numbers" (Hutcheson, F., 1729, "An inquiry into the original of our ideas of beauty and virtue", London).
Smith, A., 1976, The Wealth of Nations edited by R.H. Campbell and A.S. Skinner, The Glasgow edition of the Works and Correspondence of Adam Smith, vol. 2a, p. 10.
Ricardo, D., [1817], Principles of Political Economy and Taxation, vol. i, p. 278, in: Sraffa (ed.), 1951, The Works and Correspondence of David Ricardo, 10 vol. (1951– 55), Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
neoclassical texts refer to the invisible hand although Smith speaks of an invisible hand; Smith earlier references to “an invisible hand” have each time a different meaning
Smith, A., 1976, The Wealth of Nations edited by R.H. Campbell and A.S. Skinner, The Glasgow edition of the Works and Correspondence of Adam Smith, vol. 2a, p. 456.
George J. Stigler (1976). "The Successes and Failures of Professor Smith," Journal of Political Economy, 84(6), p. 1202 (pp. 1199–1213). Also published as Selected Papers, No. 50 (PDF), Graduate School of Business, University of Chicago.
George J. Stigler, 1951. "The Division of Labor Is Limited by the Extent of the Market." Journal of Political Economy, 59(3), pp. 185, 193. Reprinted in J.M. Buchanan and Y.J. Yoon, ed., 1994, The Return to Increasing Returns, pp. 47, 58.
Paul A. Samuelson (1977). "A Modern Theorist's Vindication of Adam Smith," American Economic Review, 67(1), p p. 42. Reprinted in J.C. Wood, ed., Adam Smith: Critical Assessments, pp. 498–509. Preview.
Smith (1776). Bk. V: Of the Revenue of the Sovereign or Commonwealth, ch. 3 Of Public Debts, para. 92.
R. H. Coase (1977). "The Wealth of Nations," Economic Inquiry 15(3), pp. 323–25 (309–325). Press + button or Ctrl+.
Mark Blaug (1997). Economic Theory in Retrospect, 5th ed., in ch. 2, sect. 19, "Adam Smith as an Economist, pp. 59–62.
Rothbard, Murray, The Adam Smith Myth, LewRockwell.com
Graeber, David (2010). Debt: the first 5,000 years. Brooklyn, NY: Melville House. ISBN 9781933633862.

    Johnson, David V. (February 15, 2012). "What We Owe to Each Other An Interview with David Graeber, Part 1". Boston Review. Retrieved February 20, 2012.

References

    An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations: A Selected Edition Adam Smith (Author), Kathryn Sutherland (Editor), 2008, Oxford Paperbacks, Oxford, UK; ISBN 978-0-19-953592-7
    Adam Smith's The Wealth of Nations: A modern-day interpretation of an economic classic. Karen McCreadie, 2009, Infinite Ideas, Oxford, UK; ISBN 978-1-906821-03-6

External links
	Wikisource has original text related to this article:
The Wealth of Nations

    Free Download in PDF, EPUB and Kindle formats
    The Wealth of Nations at MetaLibri Digital Library
    The Theory of Moral Sentiments at MetaLibri Digital Library
    An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations at Project Gutenberg
    An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations, 1776 (accessible by table of contents and chapter titles), 5th and final edition by Smith, with Preface and Introduction by Edwin Cannan in 1904
    Life of Adam Smith, by John Rae, at the Library of Economics and Liberty
    An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations Google's scan of the book so it is without search capability
    Wealth of Nations Reading Notes
    An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations Facsimile of the original two volumes: Volume 1 (2nd edition/ 1778) & Volume 2 (1st edition/ 1776)
    Works by Adam Smith at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks) Speaker Icon.svg

[show]

    v
    t
    e

Adam Smith
[show]

    v
    t
    e

Property
Categories:

    1776 books
    Classical liberalism
    Economics books
    History books about civilization
    Political philosophy literature
    Books about wealth distribution
    Books by Adam Smith
    1776 in Scotland
    1776 in economics
	
	Panama–California Exposition
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
For the Panama-Pacific Exposition in San Francisco, see Panama–Pacific International Exposition.
EXPO San Diego 1915–1916
Guide Book of the Panama California Exposition.jpg
Official guide book
Overview
BIE-class 	Unrecognized exposition
Name 	Panama–California Exposition
Area 	640 acres (260 ha)
Visitors 	3,747,916
Organized by 	Panama–California Exposition Company
Location
Country 	United States
City 	San Diego
Venue 	Balboa Park
Coordinates 	32°43′53″N 117°09′01″W
Timeline
Opening 	January 1, 1915
Closure 	January 1, 1917
Specialized expositions
Simultaneous
Other 	Panama–Pacific International Exposition (San Francisco)

The Panama–California Exposition was an exposition held in San Diego, California, between January 1, 1915, and January 1, 1917. The exposition celebrated the opening of the Panama Canal, and was meant to tout San Diego as the first U.S. port of call for ships traveling north after passing westward through the canal. The fair was held in San Diego's large urban Balboa Park.

Contents

    1 Proposal and formation
    2 Design
        2.1 Exposition site
        2.2 Spanish Colonial Revival architecture
    3 Construction
    4 Exposition layout
        4.1 Permanent structures
        4.2 Temporary buildings
        4.3 Transportation
        4.4 Other features
    5 Opening of the exposition
        5.1 Extension
    6 Legacy
    7 Later exposition and rebuilding
    8 Centennial
    9 Exhibition map
    10 References
    11 Further reading
    12 External links

Proposal and formation

Beginning on July 9, 1909, San Diego's Chamber of Commerce president and local businessman Gilbert Aubrey Davidson proposed an exposition to commemorate the completion of the Panama Canal.[1] San Diego by 1910 had a population of 37,578,[2] and would be the least populated city to ever host an international exposition.[1] In contrast, San Francisco had a population nearly 10 times larger[2] and would ultimately be supported by politicians in California and Washington, D.C. for the official Panama Canal exposition, the Panama–Pacific International Exposition. Although representatives from San Francisco urged San Diego to end its planning, San Diego pressed forward for a simultaneous exposition.[3] Several San Franciscans persuaded both members of Congress and President William Howard Taft to deny support for San Diego's exposition in exchange for pledged political support for Taft's campaign against Republicans.[4] With no federal and little state government funding, San Diego's exposition would be on a smaller scale with fewer states and countries participating.[5][6]

The Panama–California Exposition Company was formed in September 1909 and its board of directors was soon led by president Ulysses S. Grant, Jr. and vice president John D. Spreckels.[1] After Grant resigned in November 1911, real estate developer "Colonel" D. C. Collier, was made president of the exposition.[7] He was responsible for selecting both the location in the city park and the Pueblo Revival and Mission Revival architectural styles.[8] Collier was tasked with steering the exposition in 'the proper direction,' ensuring that every decision made reflected his vision of what the exposition could accomplish. Collier once stated "The purpose of the Panama–California Exposition is to illustrate the progress and possibility of the human race, not for the exposition only, but for a permanent contribution to the world's progress."[9] The exposition's leadership changed again in early March 1914, when Collier encountered personal financial issues and resigned. He was replaced by Davidson who was also joined by several new vice presidents.[10]

By March 1910, $1 million ($25,310,714 today) was raised for the expo by the Panama–California Exposition Company through selling subscriptions.[11] Further, by August a voter-approved bond provided an additional $1 million solely for improving permanent fixtures in the park. Funding for the California State Building was provided through appropriation bills totaling $450,000 ($11,389,821 today) signed by Governor Hiram Johnson in both 1911 and 1913.[12]
Design
There were arcades by major Exposition buildings, such as this decorated one on the United States Building

Fair officials first sought architect John Galen Howard as their supervisory architect. With Howard unavailable, on January 27, 1911, they chose New York architect Bertram Goodhue in that role, also appointing Irving Gill to assist Goodhue.[13] By September 1911 Gill had resigned and was replaced by Carleton Winslow of Goodhue's office, just as the original landscape architects, the Olmsted Brothers had left and were replaced in their role by fair official Frank P. Allen, Jr.[8]
Exposition site

The exposition's location was selected to be inside the 1,400 acres (570 ha) of Balboa Park. For the first few decades of its existence, "City Park" remained mostly open space. The land, lacking trees and covered in native wildflowers, was home to bobcats, rattlesnakes, coyotes, and other wildlife.[14] Numerous proposals, some altruistic, some profit-driven, were brought forward for the development and use of the land during this time. Several buildings including a high school, nursery, and gunpowder magazine were eventually built in the park, prior to the initial 1909 plan proposed by Davidson. During construction in 1910, a contest was held that renamed the park after Vasco Núñez de Balboa, the first European to cross Central America and see the Pacific Ocean.[15]

Two north-south canyons — Cabrillo Canyon and Florida Canyon — traverse the park and separate it into three mesas.[16] Cabrillo Canyon (formerly known as Pound Canyon) forms a deep separation between the exposition site and the park entrance from downtown San Diego. The park is essentially rectangular, now bounded by Sixth Avenue to the west, Upas Street to the north, 28th Street to the east, and Russ Boulevard to the south.
Spanish Colonial Revival architecture

Goodhue and Winslow advocated a design that turned away from the more modest, indigenous, horizontally oriented Pueblo Revival and Mission Revival, towards a more ornate and urban Spanish Baroque. Contrasting with bare walls, rich Mexican and Spanish Churrigueresque decoration would be used, with influences from the Islamic and Persian styles in Moorish Revival architecture.

For American world's fairs, this was a novelty. The design was intentionally in contrast to most previous Eastern U.S. and European expositions, which had been done in neoclassical and Beaux-Arts styles, with large formal buildings around large symmetric spaces. Even San Francisco's simultaneous Panama–Pacific International Exposition was largely, though not exclusively, in Beaux-Arts style.[17]

Goodhue had already experimented with Spanish Baroque in Havana, at the 1905 La Santisima Trinidad pro-cathedral, and the Hotel Colon in Panama. Some of his specific stylistic sources for San Diego are the Giralda Tower at the Seville Cathedral, the Mexico City Metropolitan Cathedral, and the Cathedral of Our Lady of the Assumption, Oaxaca.[18]

Goodhue personally designed the largest and most ornate building on the site, the California Building, with its historical iconography; he sketched two other buildings, provided Winslow and Allen with his photographs and drawings from examples in Spain and Mexico, and reviewed their developed designs.[8] The original ensemble of buildings featured various stylistic and period references. Taken together, they constituted something like a recapitulated history of Spanish colonial in North America, from Renaissance Europe sources, to Spanish colonial, to Mexican Baroque, to the vernacular styles adopted by the Franciscan missions up the California coast.[18] The Botanical Building was designed by Winslow with help from Allen and Thomas B. Hunter in the style of a Spanish Renaissance greenhouse.[19]

This mix of influences at San Diego proved popular enough to earn its own name: Spanish Colonial Revival. The Exposition brought Spanish Colonial Revival into becoming California's "indigenous historical vernacular style", very popular in poured concrete through the 1920s, still used and reinterpreted in the present day. To some extent it was even adopted as a southwestern regional style, as seen at the Pima County Courthouse in Tucson, Arizona, with a few minor examples in Phoenix.[20] Prior to the exposition, San Diego had predominately featured Victorian architecture with some elements of classical styles.[21] The popularity of the expo led to more emphasis on mission architecture within the city.

Goodhue moved on to other national projects, while Winslow stayed on in southern California, continued to produce his own variations of the style, at the Bishop's School in La Jolla and the 1926 Carthay Circle Theatre in Los Angeles. Winslow was also instrumental in persuading the city of Santa Barbara to adopt Spanish Colonial Revival as the officially mandated civic style after its 1925 earthquake. The major example from the rebuilding is the Santa Barbara County Courthouse.[22]

The temporary installations, decoration, and landscapes of Balboa Park were created with some large spaces and numerous paths, small spaces, and courtyard Spanish gardens. The location was also moved from a small hillock to a larger and more open area, most of which was intended to be reclaimed by the park as gardens.[23]
Construction

The groundbreaking ceremony for the site of the expo was held on July 19, 1911.[24] To make room for the exposition planned layout, several city buildings, machine shops, and a gunpowder magazine were moved offsite.[25] The first building to begin construction was the Administration Building which started in November 1911 and completed in March 1912.[26] Visitors interested in watching the ongoing construction before the exposition's official opening were charged admission of $0.25 ($6 today).[27]
Exposition layout
The Cabrillo Bridge looking towards the West Gate

The layout of the 640-acre (260 ha) expo was contained by three entrances on the west, north, and east.[28] The East Gateway was approached by drive and San Diego Electric Railway trolley cars winding up from the city through the southern portion of the park. From the west, the Cabrillo Bridge's entrance was marked with blooming giant century plants and led straight to the dramatic West Gate (or City Gate), with the city's coat-of-arms at its crown. The archway was flanked by engaged Doric orders supporting an entablature, with figures symbolizing the Atlantic and Pacific oceans joining waters together, in commemoration of the opening of the Panama Canal. These figures were the work of Furio Piccirilli. While the west gateway was part of the Fine Arts Building, the east gateway was designed to be the formal entrance for the California State Building. The East or State Gateway carried the California state coat-of-arms over the arch. The spandrels over the arch were filled with glazed colored tile commemorating the 1769 arrival of Spain and the 1846 State Constitutional Convention at Monterey.[23] Near a large parking lot, the north gate led to the Painted Desert and 2,500-foot (760 m) long Isthmus street. The Santa Fe Railway-sponsored Painted Desert (called "Indian Village" by guests), a 5-acre (2.0 ha), 300-person exhibit populated by seven Native American tribes including the Apache, Navajo, and Tewa.[29][30][31] The Painted Desert had the appearance of a rock structure but was actually wire frames covered in cement.[32] The Isthmus was surrounded by concessions, amusement rides and games, a replica gem mine, an ostrich farm, and a 250-foot (76 m) replica of the Panama Canal.[30]
Permanent structures

Intended to be permanent were the Cabrillo Bridge, the domed-and-towered California State Building and the low-lying Fine Arts Building; the latter are now part of the National Register of Historic Places-listed California Quadrangle. The Botanical Building would protect heat-loving plants, while the Spreckels Organ Pavilion would assist open-air concerts in its auditorium. The Botanical Building was completed for $53,400 ($1,257,295 today).[33]

The Cabrillo Bridge was built to span the canyon, and the appearance of its long horizontal stretch ending in a great upright pile of fantasy buildings would be the crux of the whole composition. This design composition and the bridge were designed to remain as a permanent focal point of the city, while many of the exhibit buildings were intended to be temporary.[34]

Upon arrival, the focus of the fair was the Plaza de California (California Quadrangle), an arcaded enclosure often containing Spanish dancers and singers, where both the approach bridge and El Prado terminate. The California State Building and the Fine Arts Building framed the plaza, which was surrounded on three sides by exhibition halls set behind an arcade on the lower story. Those three sides, following the heavy massiveness and crude simplicity of the California mission adobe style, were without ornamentation. This contrasted with the front facade of the California State Building, 'wild' with Churrigueresque complex lines of mouldings and dense ornamentation. Next to the frontispiece, at one corner of the dome, rose the 200 feet (61 m) tower of the California Building, which was echoed in the less prominent turrets of the Southern California counties and the Science and Education buildings. The style of the frontispiece was repeated around the fair.[23]
Temporary buildings
Casa de Balboa, as rebuilt in the 1980s, and the El Prado Arcade

The architecture of the "temporary buildings" was recognized, as Goodhue described, as "being essentially of the fabric of a dream—not to endure but to produce a merely temporary effect. It should provide, after the fashion that stage scenery provides—illusion rather than reality."[23][35]

The "temporary buildings" were formally and informally set on either side of the wide, tree-lined central avenue. El Prado extended along the axis of the bridge and was lined with trees and streetlights, with the front of most buildings lined with covered arcades or portales. The Prado was intended to become the central path of a great and formally designed public garden. The fair's pathways, pools, and watercourses were supposed to remain while the cleared building sites would become garden. Goodhue emphasized that "only by thus razing all of the Temporary Buildings will San Diego enter upon the heritage that is rightfully hers".[23] However, many of the "temporary" buildings were retained and reused for the 1935 fair. Four of them were demolished and rebuilt in their original style toward the end of the 20th century; they are now called the House of Charm, the House of Hospitality, Casa del Prado, and Casa de Balboa, and are included in the National Register of Historic Places-listed El Prado Complex.
Transportation
One of the San Diego Electric Railway streetcars at 5th and Broadway in San Diego, CA (1915)

One of the main considerations for San Diego leaders concerning the Panama–California Exposition was transportation. At the request of John D. Spreckels and his San Diego Electric Railway Company, the park's layout design incorporated an electric railway that ran near the east gate of the park.[36][37] To service the large number of people that were to attend the exposition, streetcars were built that could handle the traffic of the event as well as the growing population of San Diego. The routes ultimately spanned from Ocean Beach, through Downtown, Mission Hills, Coronado, North Park, Golden Hill, and Kensington, even briefly serving as a link to the U.S.–Mexico border. Today, only three of the original twenty-four Class 1 streetcars remain in existence.[38]

At the beginning of the exposition, 200 small wicker motorized chairs, known as electriquettes, were available for rent by visitors.[39] Constructed by the Los Angeles Exposition Motor Chair Company, these slow speed transports held two to three people and were used for traveling throughout the majority of the exhibition. For the centennial celebration in 2015, plans are being developed to provide replica electriquettes for visitor rentals.[40]
Other features

Additional elements of the exposition included an aviary, rose gardens, and animal pens.[25] Throughout the exposition grounds there were over two million plants of 1,200 different types.[41] Peacocks and pheasants freely wandered through the fairgrounds, and pigeons were frequently fed by guests.[42]

At the opening of the exposition, it did not feature any buildings that were represented by foreign countries.[5] A handful of U.S states held exhibits southwest of the organ pavilion: Kansas, Montana, New Mexico, Washington, and Utah (Nevada's building was located near the open-air theatre).[5][43] In contrast, the San Francisco Panama-Pacific Exposition featured exhibits from 22 countries and 28 U.S. states.[39] Many of the state buildings would eventually be used for the 1916 extension by various countries. The majority were temporary structures that were demolished after the expo.

The United States Marines, Army, and Navy were featured at the expo, with exhibits, onsite tent cities, parades, band concerts, and live mock battles.[44][45]
Opening of the exposition

At midnight (in San Diego) on December 31, 1914, President Woodrow Wilson ceremoniously pushed a telegraph button in Washington, D.C. to open the expo by turning on the power and lights at the park.[46][47] In addition, a lit balloon located 1,500 feet above the park further brightened the exposition.[48] Guns at the nearby Fort Rosecrans and on Navy ships in San Diego Bay also were fired to signal the opening.[47]

Admission for adults was $0.50 ($12 today) and $0.25 ($6 today) for children.[44] Based on varying sources, the opening day's attendance was between 31,836 and 42,486.[49] By the end of the first month, daily attendance decreased, with an average number of guests at 4,783 a day, which decreased to 4,360 by February.[50] However, in April 1915 it was announced that the expo had already resulted in a $40,000 ($932,500 today) profit for the first three months.[51][52] By May, the average daily attendance had increased to 5,800 and in July the total attendance had reached a million visitors.[53]
Attendance at the expo in 1915 totaled over two million

Notable guests of the event include Vice President Thomas R. Marshall, Secretary of State William Jennings Bryan, Franklin D. Roosevelt, then Secretary of the Navy, former presidents William Howard Taft and Theodore Roosevelt, inventor Thomas Edison, and automobile businessman Henry Ford.[35][53][54][55][56] The attempt to "put San Diego on the map" with national attention was successful. Even Pennsylvania's Liberty Bell made a brief three-day appearance in November 1915.[57] At the end of 1915, total visitors reached over two million and the expo had turned a small profit of $56,570 ($1,318,788 today).[58][59]
Extension

Prior to the end of 1915, plans began circulating for extending the exposition for another year. Most of the board of directors, however, were not able to continue into the new year and resigned. Funding for the 1916 addition came from Los Angeles, local businessman, proceeds from the 1915 expo, leftover funding from the Panama–Pacific International Exposition, and chambers of commerce outside of San Diego.[58][57][60][61] On March 18, 1916 Secretary of the Navy Josephus Daniels pushed a button in Washington, D.C. that sounded a gong in the Plaza de Panama to commemorate "Exposition Dedication Day".[62] While originally opened as Panama–California Exposition, the fair was rechristened the Panama–California International Exposition.[60] This was actually valid renaming, for while the fair originally had no international exhibitors, by 1916 it had exhibits from Brazil, Canada, France, Germany, Italy, the Netherlands, Russia, and Switzerland.[61][63] Most came from the recently closed Panama-Pacific International Exposition in San Francisco some of whom were unable to return to Europe due to World War I which had been raging since 1914. Additional exhibits included an ice rink, an alligator farm, and performance shows.[64] Some of the original buildings from the prior year were repurposed for new exhibits.[64]

In November 1916, Gilbert Davidson asked the Park Board for an additional three-month extension into 1917,[65] but the expo was concluded on January 1, 1917. Events on the final day included a military parade in the Plaza de Panama, a mock military battle, and an opera ceremony at the organ pavilion. At midnight, the lights were turned off and pyrotechnics above the organ spelled "WORLD PEACE–1917".[59] The total attendance for the second year was just under 1.7 million people.[59] Over the two years a slight profit was earned over the total cost of organizing and hosting the expo.[66][67]
Legacy

"It is so beautiful that I wish to make an earnest plea...I hope that not only will you keep these buildings running for another year but you will keep these buildings of rare, phenomenal taste and beauty permanently."
—Theodore Roosevelt, speaking at the Spreckels Organ Pavilion on July 27, 1915[53]

Speaking in July 1915, former President Theodore Roosevelt spoke to San Diegans at the Spreckels Organ Pavilion, and requested that San Diego keep the exhibition buildings permanently.[53]

The Exposition's permanent buildings, still standing, include:
La Laguna de Las Flores

    Botanical Building, one of the largest lath-covered structures then in existence, contained a rare collection of tropical and semitropical plants. It is well back from the Prado behind the long pool, La Laguna de Las Flores.
    Cabrillo Bridge (completed April 12, 1914)
    California Bell Tower, completed 1914, 198 feet (60 m) feet tall to the top of the iron weathervane, which is in the form of a Spanish ship; one of the most recognizable sights in San Diego as "San Diego's Icon".
    California State Building, completed October 2, 1914, which now houses the San Diego Museum of Man. The design was inspired by the church of San Diego in Guanajuato, Mexico.[68]
    Chapel of St. Francis of Assisi (south side of Fine Arts Building); now the Saint Francis Chapel operated by the Museum of Man.
    Fine Arts Building (on south side of Plaza of California), now part of the Museum of Man.

Spreckels Organ pavilion

    Spreckels Organ Pavilion (dedicated December 31, 1914).

The fair left a permanent mark in San Diego in its development of Balboa Park. Up to that point, the park had been mainly open space. But with the landscaping and building done for the fair the park was permanently transformed and is now a major cultural center, housing many of San Diego's major museums. Even before the end of the first year of the expo, an organization was established to determine how the temporary buildings could be developed for museum use.[69] The exposition also led to the eventual establishment of the San Diego Zoo in the park, which grew out of abandoned exotic animal exhibitions from the Isthmus portion of the expo.[70]

During the expo, Franklin D. Roosevelt, then Assistant Secretary of the Navy, told reporters that San Diego would become a Navy port.[52] This declaration would gradually result in multiple Navy installations in and around San Diego that still continue today. Shortly after the end of the expo, the Army and Marines temporarily used several empty expo buildings until nearby bases were completed.[70]
Exposition name 	Later or alternate name 	Notes
Administration Building (1915) 	Gill Administration Building 	(completed March 1912) now holds offices of the San Diego Museum of Man
Commerce & Industries Building (1915) 	Canadian Building (1916); Palace of Better Housing (1935) 	renamed Electrical Building and lost in a 1978 arson fire, reconstructed as the Casa de Balboa
Foreign Arts Building (1915) 		altered and renamed House Of Hospitality[68] in 1935, reconstructed to be permanent in 1997
Varied Industries & Food Products Building (1915) 	Foreign & Domestic Building (1916); Palace of Food & Beverages (1935) 	1971 reconstruction named Casa del Prado[68]
Montana State Building (1915) 		demolished
New Mexico State Building (1915) 	Palace of Education (1935) 	now used by Balboa Park Club
Home Economy Building (1915) 	Pan-Pacific Building (1916) Cafe of the World (1935) 	Timken Museum of Art built on site in 1965
Indian Arts Building (1915) 	Arts & Crafts Building (tentative); Russia & Brazil Building (1916) 	rebuilt to exacting specification in 1996 as the House of Charm
San Joaquin Valley Building (1915) 		demolished
Science & Education Building (1915) 	Science of Man exhibit, Palace of Science & Photography (1935) 	demolished in 1964 (exhibit inspired creation of Museum of Man)
Southern California Counties Building (1915) 	Civic Auditorium 	burned down in 1925, replaced in 1933 with San Diego Natural History Museum[68]
Kansas State Building (1915) 	Theosophical Headquarters (1916); United Nations/House of Italy 	designed in the spirit of Mission San Luis Rey in Oceanside
Sacramento Valley Building (1915) 	United States Building (1916) 	replaced by San Diego Museum of Art in 1926
Painted Desert (1915) 		later used by military and Boy Scouts; demolished in 1946[32][71]
Washington State Building (1915) 		demolished
Later exposition and rebuilding

The California Pacific International Exposition at the same site in 1935 was so popular that some buildings were rebuilt to be made more permanent. Many buildings or reconstructed versions remain in use today, and are used by several museums and theatres in Balboa Park.

In the early 1960s destruction of a few of the buildings and replacement by modern, architecturally clashing buildings created an uproar in San Diego. In 1967, citizens formed A Committee of One Hundred to protect and preserve the park buildings.[72] They convinced the City Council to require new buildings to be built in Spanish Colonial Revival Style and worked with various government agencies to have the remaining buildings declared as a National Historic Landmark in 1977.[73] In the late 1990s, the most deteriorated buildings and burned buildings were rebuilt, preserving the original style.
Centennial

The City of San Diego is planning a major observation of the 2015 centennial of the Exposition. The park institutions will have special programming for the centennial; specific programming within the park but outside the City leaseholds is under development.[6] The most ambitious proposal was one which would remove vehicle traffic and parking from the central Plaza de California and Plaza de Panama, using a newly constructed ramp off the Cabrillo Bridge to divert vehicles around the California Quadrangle to a parking structure behind the Organ Pavilion.[74] The proposal was controversial and was eventually dropped due to legal challenges.[75]
Exhibition map
Detailed map of the expo in 1915
References

Amero (2013), p. 13
"Table 22. Nativity of the Population for Urban Places Ever Among the 50 Largest Urban Places Since 1870: 1850 to 1990". United States Census Bureau. October 31, 2011. Archived from the original on November 16, 2014. Retrieved November 16, 2014.
Amero (2013), p. 16
Amero (2013), p. 17
Pourade (1965), p. 186
Showley, Roger (November 12, 2012). "California Tower may open to visitors". U-T San Diego. Archived from the original on June 28, 2014. Retrieved June 28, 2014.
Amero (2013), p. 26
Amero, Richard A. (Winter 1990). "The Making of the Panama-California Exposition, 1909-1915" 38 (1). San Diego Historical Society. Archived from the original on June 28, 2014. Retrieved June 28, 2014.
Christman (1985), p. 43
Amero (2013), p. 34
Amero (2013), p. 222
Amero (2013), p. 39
Amero (2013), p. 19
Christman (1985), p. 16
Montes, Gregory (Winter 1982). "Balboa Park, 1909–1911 The Rise and Fall of the Olmsted Plan". The Journal of San Diego History 28 (1). Archived from the original on July 18, 2011.
Harper, Hilliard (October 6, 1985). "The Happy Accident" (Fee required). Los Angeles Times. Retrieved September 27, 2011.
Smith, James R. "San Francisco's Finest World's Fair". San Francisco City Guides. Archived from the original on November 22, 2014. Retrieved November 22, 2014.
"Hard Times, High Visions". Bancroft Library. University of California, Berkeley. June 10, 2009. Archived from the original on November 22, 2014. Retrieved November 22, 2014.
"People & Events: The Panama Pacific International Exposition". American Experience. WGBH Educational Foundation. 2002. Archived from the original on November 22, 2014. Retrieved November 22, 2014.
Starr, Kevin (December 4, 1986). Americans and the California dream, 1850-1915. Oxford University Press. p. 405. ISBN 0-195042-33-6.
Amero (2013), p. 46
Gebhard, David (1967). "The Spanish Colonial Revival in Southern California (1895-1930)" (PDF). Journal of the Society of Architectural Historians (Society of Architectural Historians) 26 (2): 131–147. doi:10.2307/988417. Archived from the original on July 9, 2011. Retrieved November 22, 2014.
Officer, James E. (1990). Hispanic Arizona, 1536-1856. University of Arizona Press. p. 13. ISBN 9780816511525. Retrieved November 22, 2014.
Starr (1986), p. 127
"Santa Barbara County Courthouse" (PDF). National Register of Historic Places. National Park Service. April 19, 2004. Archived from the original on November 22, 2014. Retrieved November 22, 2014.
Winslow, Carleton Monroe (1916). The Architecture and the Gardens of the San Diego Exposition. San Francisco: Paul Elder and Company.
Brandes, Ray (1981). San Diego: An Illustrated History. Los Angeles: Rosebud Books. p. 129. ISBN 0-86558-006-5.
Amero (2013), p. 35
Amero (2013), p. 36
Amero (2013), p. 50
Amero (2013), p. 57
Amero (2013), p. 48
Amero (2013), p. 60
Amero (2013), p. 165
Starr (1986), p. 129
Amero (2013), p. 47
"History". Balboa Park Online Collaborative. Balboa Park. Archived from the original on November 22, 2014. Retrieved November 22, 2014.
"History of the California Building in Balboa Park". San Diego History Center. Balboa Park Online Collaborative. Archived from the original on November 22, 2014. Retrieved November 22, 2014.
Michelle, Tom Grimm (October 7, 1979). "Growing Years of Balboa Park". Los Angeles Times.
Pourade (1965), p. 198
Amero (2013), p. 27
Amero (2013), p. 51
Hurley, Morgan M. (June 8, 2012). "Restored historic streetcar showcased at Trolley Barn Park". San Diego Uptown News. Archived from the original on June 18, 2014. Retrieved June 18, 2014.
Amero (2013), p. 56
Showley, Roger (November 15, 2012). "Balboa Park's 'Electriquettes' may return". U-T San Diego. Archived from the original on November 21, 2014.
Christman (1985), p. 46
Amero (2013), p. 148
Amero (2013), p. 49
Amero (2013), p. 62
Amero (2013), p. 71
Christman (1985), p. 45
Pourade (1965), p. 183
Amero (2013), p. 53
Amero (2013), p. 54
Pourade (1965), p. 193
Pourade (1965), p. 195
Amero (2013), p. 85
Pourade (1965), p. 197
Pourade (1965), p. 194
Amero (2013), p. 101
Starr (1986), p. 128
Pourade (1965), p. 199
Pourade (1965), p. 199
Amero (2013), p. 133
Amero (2013), p. 106
Amero (2013), p. 108
Amero (2013), p. 117
Amero (2013), p. 114
Amero (2013), p. 116
Amero (2013), p. 127
Showley (2000), p. 94
Pourade (1965), p. 218
Carolyn Pitts (July 19, 1977), National Register of Historic Places Inventory-Nomination: Balboa Park (PDF), National Park Service, retrieved 2009-06-22 and Accompanying 18 photos, undated PDF (6.37 MB)
Amero (2013), p. 99
Amero (2013), p. 139
Adkins, Lynn (Spring 1983). "Jesse L. Nusbaum and the Painted Desert in San Diego" 29 (2). San Diego Historical Society. Archived from the original on January 3, 2015. Retrieved January 3, 2015.
"About Us". Committee of One Hundred. Archived from the original on November 22, 2014. Retrieved November 22, 2014.
"National Historic Landmark Program – Balboa Park". National Park Service. Archived from the original on July 18, 2011. Retrieved December 14, 2014.
Showley, Roger (August 31, 2010). "Plaza plan for Balboa Park unveiled". U-T San Diego. Archived from the original on November 22, 2014. Retrieved November 22, 2014.

    Showley, Roger (February 5, 2013). "Jacobs exits Balboa Park plan". U-T San Diego. Archived from the original on November 22, 2014. Retrieved November 22, 2014.

Bibliography

    Amero, Richard W. (2013). Balboa Park and the 1915 Exposition (1st ed.). Charleston, South Carolina: The History Press. ISBN 1-626193-45-2.
    Christman, Florence (1985). The Romance of Balboa Park (4th ed.). San Diego: San Diego Historical Society. ISBN 0-918740-03-7.
    Pourade, Richard F. (1965). Gold in the Sun (1st ed.). San Diego: The Union-Tribune Publishing Company. ISBN 0-913938-04-1.
    Starr, Raymond G. (1986). San Diego: A Pictorial History (1st ed.). Norfolk: The Donning Company. ISBN 089865484X.

Further reading

    The Official Guide Book of the Panama California Exposition San Diego 1915
    San Diego’s Balboa Park by David Marshall, AIA, Arcadia Publishing, 2007, ISBN 978-0-7385-4754-1
    Phoebe S. Kropp, California Vieja: Culture and Memory in a Modern American Past. Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press, 2006. ISBN 0-520-24364-1
    The San Diego World's Fairs and Southwestern Memory, 1880-1940 by Matthew F. Bokovoy, University of New Mexico Press, 2005. ISBN 0-826-33642-6

External links
	Wikimedia Commons has media related to Panama-California Exposition.

    "The Making of the Panama-California Exposition, 1909-1915", The Journal of San Diego History 36:1 (Winter 1990), by Richard W. Amero
    "The Southwest on Display at the Panama-California Exposition, 1915", The Journal of San Diego History 36:4 (Fall 1990), by Richard W. Amero
    Panama-California Exposition Digital Archive

	World War II
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
  (Redirected from Second world war)
"The Second World War" and "WWII" redirect here. For other uses, see The Second World War (disambiguation) and WWII (disambiguation).
Page semi-protected
World War II
Infobox collage for WWII.PNG
Clockwise from top left: Chinese forces in the Battle of Wanjialing, Australian 25-pounder guns during the First Battle of El Alamein, German Stuka dive bombers on the Eastern Front in December 1943, a US naval force in the Lingayen Gulf, Wilhelm Keitel signing the German Instrument of Surrender, Soviet troops in the Battle of Stalingrad
Date 	1 September 1939 – 2 September 1945 (6 years, 1 day)[a]
Location 	Europe, Pacific, Atlantic, South-East Asia, China, Middle East, Mediterranean, North Africa and Horn of Africa, briefly North and South America
Result 	Allied victory

    Collapse of the Third Reich
    Fall of Japanese and Italian Empires
    Creation of the United Nations
    Emergence of the United States and the Soviet Union as superpowers
    Beginning of the Cold War (more...).

Participants
Allies 	Axis
Commanders and leaders
Main Allied leaders
Soviet Union Joseph Stalin
United States Franklin Roosevelt
United Kingdom Winston Churchill
Republic of China (1912–49) Chiang Kai-shek
	Main Axis leaders
Nazi Germany Adolf Hitler
Empire of Japan Hirohito
Kingdom of Italy Benito Mussolini
Casualties and losses
Military dead:
Over 16,000,000
Civilian dead:
Over 45,000,000
Total dead:
Over 61,000,000 (1937–45)
...further details 	Military dead:
Over 8,000,000
Civilian dead:
Over 4,000,000
Total dead:
Over 12,000,000 (1937–45)
...further details
[show]

    v
    t
    e

Campaigns of World War II
World War II
Alphabetical indices

    A B C D E F G H I J K L M
    N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z
    0-9

Navigation

        Campaigns
        Countries
        Equipment
        Lists
        Outline
        Timeline
        Portal
        Category

    v
    t
    e

World War II (WWII or WW2), also known as the Second World War (after the recent Great War), was a global war that lasted from 1939 to 1945, though related conflicts began earlier. It involved the vast majority of the world's nations—including all of the great powers—eventually forming two opposing military alliances: the Allies and the Axis. It was the most widespread war in history, and directly involved more than 100 million people from over 30 countries. In a state of "total war", the major participants threw their entire economic, industrial, and scientific capabilities behind the war effort, erasing the distinction between civilian and military resources. Marked by mass deaths of civilians, including the Holocaust (during which approximately 11 million people were killed)[1][2] and the strategic bombing of industrial and population centres (during which approximately one million people were killed, including the use of two nuclear weapons in combat),[3] it resulted in an estimated 50 million to 85 million fatalities. These made World War II the deadliest conflict in human history.[4]

The Empire of Japan aimed to dominate Asia and the Pacific and was already at war with the Republic of China in 1937,[5] but the world war is generally said to have begun on 1 September 1939[6] with the invasion of Poland by Germany and subsequent declarations of war on Germany by France and the United Kingdom. From late 1939 to early 1941, in a series of campaigns and treaties, Germany conquered or controlled much of continental Europe, and formed the Axis alliance with Italy and Japan. Following the Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact, Germany and the Soviet Union partitioned and annexed territories of their European neighbours, including Poland, Finland and the Baltic states. The United Kingdom and the British Commonwealth were the only Allied forces continuing the fight against the Axis, with campaigns in North Africa and the Horn of Africa as well as the long-running Battle of the Atlantic. In June 1941, the European Axis powers launched an invasion of the Soviet Union, opening the largest land theatre of war in history, which trapped the major part of the Axis' military forces into a war of attrition. In December 1941, Japan attacked the United States and European territories in the Pacific Ocean, and quickly conquered much of the Western Pacific.

The Axis advance halted in 1942 when Japan lost the critical Battle of Midway, near Hawaii, and Germany was defeated in North Africa and then, decisively, at Stalingrad in the Soviet Union. In 1943, with a series of German defeats on the Eastern Front, the Allied invasion of Italy which brought about Italian surrender, and Allied victories in the Pacific, the Axis lost the initiative and undertook strategic retreat on all fronts. In 1944, the Western Allies invaded France, while the Soviet Union regained all of its territorial losses and invaded Germany and its allies. During 1944 and 1945 the Japanese suffered major reverses in mainland Asia in South Central China and Burma, while the Allies crippled the Japanese Navy and captured key Western Pacific islands.

The war in Europe ended with an invasion of Germany by the Western Allies and the Soviet Union culminating in the capture of Berlin by Soviet and Polish troops and the subsequent German unconditional surrender on 8 May 1945. Following the Potsdam Declaration by the Allies on 26 July 1945, the United States dropped atomic bombs on the Japanese cities of Hiroshima and Nagasaki on 6 August and 9 August respectively. With an invasion of the Japanese archipelago imminent, the possibility of additional atomic bombings, and the Soviet Union's declaration of war on Japan and invasion of Manchuria, Japan surrendered on 15 August 1945. Thus ended the war in Asia, and the final destruction of the Axis bloc.

World War II altered the political alignment and social structure of the world. The United Nations (UN) was established to foster international co-operation and prevent future conflicts. The victorious great powers—the United States, the Soviet Union, China, the United Kingdom, and France—became the permanent members of the United Nations Security Council.[7] The Soviet Union and the United States emerged as rival superpowers, setting the stage for the Cold War, which lasted for the next 46 years. Meanwhile, the influence of European great powers waned, while the decolonisation of Asia and Africa began. Most countries whose industries had been damaged moved towards economic recovery. Political integration, especially in Europe, emerged as an effort to end pre-war enmities and to create a common identity.[8]
Contents

    1 Chronology
    2 Background
    3 Pre-war events
        3.1 Italian invasion of Ethiopia (1935)
        3.2 Spanish Civil War (1936–39)
        3.3 Japanese invasion of China (1937)
        3.4 Japanese invasion of the Soviet Union and Mongolia (1938)
        3.5 European occupations and agreements
    4 Course of the war
        4.1 War breaks out in Europe (1939–40)
        4.2 Western Europe (1940–41)
        4.3 Mediterranean (1940–41)
        4.4 Axis attack on the USSR (1941)
        4.5 War breaks out in the Pacific (1941)
        4.6 Axis advance stalls (1942–43)
        4.7 Allies gain momentum (1943–44)
        4.8 Allies close in (1944)
        4.9 Axis collapse, Allied victory (1944–45)
    5 Aftermath
    6 Impact
        6.1 Casualties and war crimes
        6.2 Concentration camps, slave labour, and genocide
        6.3 Occupation
        6.4 Home fronts and production
        6.5 Advances in technology and warfare
    7 See also
    8 Notes
    9 Citations
    10 References
    11 External links

Chronology
See also: Timeline of World War II

The start of the war in Europe is generally held to be 1 September 1939,[9][10] beginning with the German invasion of Poland; Britain and France declared war on Germany two days later. The dates for the beginning of war in the Pacific include the start of the Second Sino-Japanese War on 7 July 1937,[11] or even the Japanese invasion of Manchuria on 19 September 1931.[12][13]

Others follow the British historian A. J. P. Taylor, who held that the Sino-Japanese War and war in Europe and its colonies occurred simultaneously and the two wars merged in 1941. This article uses the conventional dating. Other starting dates sometimes used for World War II include the Italian invasion of Abyssinia on 3 October 1935.[14] The British historian Antony Beevor views the beginning of the Second World War as the Battles of Khalkhin Gol fought between Japan and the forces of Mongolia and the Soviet Union from May to September 1939.[15]

The exact date of the war's end is also not universally agreed upon. It was generally accepted at the time that the war ended with the armistice of 14 August 1945 (V-J Day), rather than the formal surrender of Japan (2 September 1945); it is even claimed in some European histories that it ended on V-E Day (8 May 1945).[citation needed] A peace treaty with Japan was signed in 1951 to formally tie up any loose ends such as compensation to be paid to Allied prisoners of war who had been victims of atrocities.[16] A treaty regarding Germany's future allowed the reunification of East and West Germany to take place in 1990 and resolved other post-World War II issues.[17]
Background
Main article: Causes of World War II

World War I had radically altered the political European map, with the defeat of the Central Powers—including Austria-Hungary, Germany and the Ottoman Empire—and the 1917 Bolshevik seizure of power in Russia. Meanwhile, existing victorious Allies such as France, Belgium, Italy, Greece and Romania gained territories, and new Nation states were created out of the collapse of Austria-Hungary and the Ottoman and Russian Empires.

To prevent a future world war, the League of Nations was created during the 1919 Paris Peace Conference. The organisation's primary goals were to prevent armed conflict through collective security, military and naval disarmament, and settling international disputes through peaceful negotiations and arbitration.

Despite strong pacifist sentiment after World War I,[18] its aftermath still caused irredentist and revanchist nationalism in several European states.These sentiments were especially marked in Germany because of the significant territorial, colonial, and financial losses incurred by the Treaty of Versailles. Under the treaty, Germany lost around 13 percent of its home territory and all of its overseas colonies, while German annexation of other states was prohibited, reparations were imposed, and limits were placed on the size and capability of the country's armed forces.[19] In addition, the Russian Civil War had led to the creation of the Soviet Union.[20]

The German Empire was dissolved in the German Revolution of 1918–1919, and a democratic government, later known as the Weimar Republic, was created. The interwar period saw strife between supporters of the new republic and hardline opponents on both the right and left. Italy, as an Entente ally, had made some post-war territorial gains, however Italian nationalists were angered that the promises made by Britain and France to secure Italian entrance into the war were not fulfilled with the peace settlement. From 1922 to 1925, the Fascist movement led by Benito Mussolini seized power in Italy with a nationalist, totalitarian, and class collaborationist agenda that abolished representative democracy, repressed socialist, left-wing and liberal forces, and pursued an aggressive expansionist foreign policy aimed at forging Italy as a world power, promising the creation of a "New Roman Empire".[21]
The League of Nations assembly, held in Geneva, Switzerland, 1930

In Germany, the Weimar Republic was attacked by right-wing elements such as the Freikorps and the Nazi party, resulting in events such as the Kapp Putsch and the Beer Hall Putsch. With the onset of the Great Depression in 1929, domestic support for Nazism and its leader Adolf Hitler rose and, in 1933, he was appointed Chancellor of Germany. In the aftermath of the Reichstag fire, Hitler created a totalitarian single-party state led by the Nazis.[22]

The Kuomintang (KMT) party in China launched a unification campaign against regional warlords and nominally unified China in the mid-1920s, but was soon embroiled in a civil war against its former Chinese communist allies.[23] In 1931, an increasingly militaristic Japanese Empire, which had long sought influence in China[24] as the first step of what its government saw as the country's right to rule Asia, used the Mukden Incident as a pretext to launch an invasion of Manchuria and establish the puppet state of Manchukuo.[25]

Too weak to resist Japan, China appealed to the League of Nations for help. Japan withdrew from the League of Nations after being condemned for its incursion into Manchuria. The two nations then fought several battles, in Shanghai, Rehe and Hebei, until the Tanggu Truce was signed in 1933. Thereafter, Chinese volunteer forces continued the resistance to Japanese aggression in Manchuria, and Chahar and Suiyuan.[26]
Adolf Hitler at a German National Socialist political rally in Weimar, October 1930

Adolf Hitler, after an unsuccessful attempt to overthrow the German government in 1923, eventually became the Chancellor of Germany in 1933. He abolished democracy, espousing a radical, racially motivated revision of the world order, and soon began a massive rearmament campaign.[27] It was at this time that multiple political scientists began to predict that a second Great War might take place.[28] Meanwhile, France, to secure its alliance, allowed Italy a free hand in Ethiopia, which Italy desired as a colonial possession. The situation was aggravated in early 1935 when the Territory of the Saar Basin was legally reunited with Germany and Hitler repudiated the Treaty of Versailles, accelerated his rearmament programme and introduced conscription.[29]

Hoping to contain Germany, the United Kingdom, France and Italy formed the Stresa Front; however, in June 1935, the United Kingdom made an independent naval agreement with Germany, easing prior restrictions. The Soviet Union, concerned due to Germany's goals of capturing vast areas of eastern Europe, wrote a treaty of mutual assistance with France. Before taking effect though, the Franco-Soviet pact was required to go through the bureaucracy of the League of Nations, which rendered it essentially toothless.[30] The United States, concerned with events in Europe and Asia, passed the Neutrality Act in August of the same year.[31] Two months later, Italy invaded Ethiopia through Italian Somaliland and Eritrea;[32] Germany was the only major European nation to support the invasion. Italy subsequently dropped its objections to Germany's goal of absorbing Austria.[33]

Hitler defied the Versailles and Locarno treaties by remilitarising the Rhineland in March 1936. He received little response from other European powers.[34] When the Spanish Civil War broke out in July, Hitler and Mussolini supported the fascist and authoritarian Nationalist forces in their civil war against the Soviet-supported Spanish Republic. Both sides used the conflict to test new weapons and methods of warfare,[35] with the Nationalists winning the war in early 1939. In October 1936, Germany and Italy formed the Rome–Berlin Axis. A month later, Germany and Japan signed the Anti-Comintern Pact, which Italy would join in the following year. In China, after the Xi'an Incident, the Kuomintang and communist forces agreed on a ceasefire to present a united front to oppose Japan.[36]
Pre-war events
Italian invasion of Ethiopia (1935)
Main article: Second Italo-Abyssinian War
Italian soldiers recruited in 1935, on their way to fight the Second Italo-Abyssinian War

The Second Italo–Abyssinian War was a brief colonial war that began in October 1935 and ended in May 1936. The war began with the invasion of the Ethiopian Empire (also known as Abyssinia) by the armed forces of the Kingdom of Italy (Regno d'Italia), which was launched from Italian Somaliland and Eritrea.[32] The war resulted in the military occupation of Ethiopia and its annexation into the newly created colony of Italian East Africa (Africa Orientale Italiana, or AOI); in addition, it exposed the weakness of the League of Nations as a force to preserve peace. Both Italy and Ethiopia were member nations, but the League did nothing when the former clearly violated the League's own Article X.[37]
Spanish Civil War (1936–39)
Main article: Spanish Civil War
The bombing of Guernica in 1937, sparked Europe-wide fears that the next war would be based on bombing of cities with very high civilian casualties

During the Spanish Civil War, Hitler and Mussolini lent military support to the Nationalist rebels, led by General Francisco Franco. The Soviet Union supported the existing government, the Spanish Republic. Over 30,000 foreign volunteers, known as the International Brigades, also fought against the Nationalists. Both Germany and the USSR used this proxy war as an opportunity to test in combat their most advanced weapons and tactics. The bombing of Guernica by the German Condor Legion in April 1937 heightened widespread concerns that the next major war would include extensive terror bombing attacks on civilians.[38][39] The Nationalists won the civil war in April 1939; Franco, now dictator, bargained with both sides during the Second World War, but never concluded any major agreements. He did send volunteers to fight on the Eastern Front under German command but Spain remained neutral and did not allow either side to use its territory.[40]
Japanese invasion of China (1937)
Main article: Second Sino-Japanese War
Japanese Imperial Army soldiers during the Battle of Shanghai, 1937

In July 1937, Japan captured the former Chinese imperial capital of Beijing after instigating the Marco Polo Bridge Incident, which culminated in the Japanese campaign to invade all of China.[41] The Soviets quickly signed a non-aggression pact with China to lend materiel support, effectively ending China's prior co-operation with Germany. Generalissimo Chiang Kai-shek deployed his best army to defend Shanghai, but, after three months of fighting, Shanghai fell. The Japanese continued to push the Chinese forces back, capturing the capital Nanking in December 1937. After the fall of Nanking, tens of thousands if not hundreds of thousands of Chinese civilians and disarmed combatants were murdered by the Japanese.[42][43]

In March 1938, Nationalist Chinese forces got their first major victory at Taierzhuang but then the city of Xuzhou was taken by Japanese in May.[44] In June 1938, Chinese forces stalled the Japanese advance by flooding the Yellow River; this manoeuvre bought time for the Chinese to prepare their defences at Wuhan, but the city was taken by October.[45] Japanese military victories did not bring about the collapse of Chinese resistance that Japan had hoped to achieve; instead the Chinese government relocated inland to Chongqing and continued the war.[46][47]
Japanese invasion of the Soviet Union and Mongolia (1938)
See also: Nanshin-ron and Soviet–Japanese border conflicts

Japanese forces in Manchukuo had sporadic border clashes with the Soviet Union, culminating in the Japanese defeat at Khalkin Gol. After this, Japan and the Soviet Union signed a Neutrality Pact in April 1941, and Japan turned its focus to the South Pacific.
European occupations and agreements
Further information: Anschluss, Appeasement, Munich Agreement, German occupation of Czechoslovakia and Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact
Chamberlain, Daladier, Hitler, Mussolini, and Ciano pictured just before signing the Munich Agreement, 29 September 1938

In Europe, Germany and Italy were becoming more bold. In March 1938, Germany annexed Austria, again provoking little response from other European powers.[48] Encouraged, Hitler began pressing German claims on the Sudetenland, an area of Czechoslovakia with a predominantly ethnic German population; and soon Britain and France followed the counsel of prime minister Neville Chamberlain and conceded this territory to Germany in the Munich Agreement, which was made against the wishes of the Czechoslovak government, in exchange for a promise of no further territorial demands.[49] Soon afterwards, Germany and Italy forced Czechoslovakia to cede additional territory to Hungary and Poland.[50]

Although all of Germany's stated demands had been satisfied by the agreement, privately Hitler was furious that British interference had prevented him from seizing all of Czechoslovakia in one operation. In subsequent speeches Hitler attacked British and Jewish "war-mongers" and in January 1939 secretly ordered a major build-up of the German navy to challenge British naval supremacy. In March 1939, Germany invaded the remainder of Czechoslovakia and subsequently split it into the German Protectorate of Bohemia and Moravia and a pro-German client state, the Slovak Republic.[51] Hitler also delivered an ultimatum to Lithuania, forcing the concession of the Klaipėda Region.
German Foreign Minister Ribbentrop signing the Nazi–Soviet non-aggression pact. Standing behind him are Molotov and the Soviet leader Joseph Stalin, 1939

Alarmed, and with Hitler making further demands on the Free City of Danzig, France and Britain guaranteed their support for Polish independence; when Italy conquered Albania in April 1939, the same guarantee was extended to Romania and Greece.[52] Shortly after the Franco-British pledge to Poland, Germany and Italy formalised their own alliance with the Pact of Steel.[53] Hitler accused Britain and Poland of trying to "encircle" Germany and renounced the Anglo-German Naval Agreement and the German–Polish Non-Aggression Pact.

In August 1939, Germany and the Soviet Union signed the Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact,[54] a non-aggression treaty with a secret protocol. The parties gave each other rights to "spheres of influence" (western Poland and Lithuania for Germany; eastern Poland, Finland, Estonia, Latvia and Bessarabia for the USSR). It also raised the question of continuing Polish independence.[55] The agreement was crucial to Hitler because it assured that Germany would not have to face the prospect of a two-front war, as it had in World War I, after it defeated Poland.

The situation reached a general crisis in late August as German troops continued to mobilise against the Polish border. In a private meeting with the Italian foreign minister, Count Ciano, Hitler asserted that Poland was a "doubtful neutral" that needed to either yield to his demands or be "liquidated" to prevent it from drawing off German troops in the future "unavoidable" war with the Western democracies. He did not believe Britain or France would intervene in the conflict.[56] On 23 August Hitler ordered the attack to proceed on 26 August, but upon hearing that Britain had concluded a formal mutual assistance pact with Poland and that Italy would maintain neutrality, he decided to delay it.[57] In response to British pleas for direct negotiations, Germany demanded on 29 August that a Polish plenipotentiary immediately travel to Berlin to negotiate the handover of Danzig and the Polish Corridor to Germany as well as to agree to safeguard the German minority in Poland. The Poles refused to comply with this request and on the evening of 31 August Germany declared that it considered its proposals rejected.[58]
Course of the war
Further information: Diplomatic history of World War II
War breaks out in Europe (1939–40)
Main articles: Invasion of Poland, Occupation of Poland (1939–45), Nazi crimes against the Polish nation, Soviet invasion of Poland and Soviet repressions of Polish citizens (1939–46)
Soldiers of the German Wehrmacht tearing down the border crossing between Poland and the Free City of Danzig, 1 September 1939

On 1 September 1939, Germany invaded Poland under the false pretext that the Poles had carried out a series of sabotage operations against German targets.[59] Two days later, on 3 September, France and the United Kingdom, followed by the fully independent Dominions[60] of the British Commonwealth[61]—Australia (3 September), Canada (10 September), New Zealand (3 September), and South Africa (6 September)—declared war on Germany. However, initially the alliance provided limited direct military support to Poland, consisting of a small French attack into the Saarland.[62] The Western Allies also began a naval blockade of Germany, which aimed to damage the country's economy and war effort.[63] Germany responded by ordering U-boat warfare against Allied merchant and war ships, which was to later escalate in the Battle of the Atlantic.
German Panzer I tanks near the city of Bydgoszcz, during the Invasion of Poland, September 1939

On 17 September 1939, after signing a cease-fire with Japan, the Soviets invaded Poland from the east.[64] The Polish army was defeated and Warsaw surrendered to the Germans on 27 September, with final pockets of resistance surrendering on 6 October. Poland's territory was divided between Germany and the Soviet Union, with Lithuania and Slovakia also receiving small shares. After the surrender of Poland's armed forces, the Polish resistance established an Underground State and a partisan Home Army.[65] About 100,000 Polish military personnel were evacuated to Romania and the Baltic countries; many of these soldiers later fought against the Germans in other theatres of the war.[66] Poland's Enigma codebreakers were also evacuated to France.[67]

On 6 October Hitler made a public peace overture to the United Kingdom and France, but said that the future of Poland was to be determined exclusively by Germany and the Soviet Union. Chamberlain rejected this on 12 October, saying "Past experience has shown that no reliance can be placed upon the promises of the present German Government."[58] After this rejection Hitler ordered an immediate offensive against France,[68] but bad weather forced repeated postponements until the spring of 1940.[69][70][71]
German and Soviet army officers pictured shaking hands—after Nazi Germany and Soviet Union annexed new territories in Eastern Europe, 1939

After signing the German–Soviet Treaty of Friendship, Cooperation and Demarcation, the Soviet Union forced the Baltic countries—Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania—to allow it to station Soviet troops in their countries under pacts of "mutual assistance".[72][73][74] Finland rejected territorial demands, prompting a Soviet invasion in November 1939.[75] The resulting Winter War ended in March 1940 with Finnish concessions.[76] The United Kingdom and France treating the Soviet attack on Finland as tantamount to its entering the war on the side of the Germans, responded to the Soviet invasion by supporting the USSR's expulsion from the League of Nations.[74]

In June 1940, the Soviet Union forcibly annexed Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania,[73] and then annexed the disputed Romanian region of Bessarabia. Meanwhile, Nazi-Soviet political rapprochement and economic co-operation[77][78] gradually stalled,[79][80] and both states began preparations for war.[81]
Western Europe (1940–41)
Map of the French Maginot Line

In April 1940, Germany invaded Denmark and Norway to protect shipments of iron ore from Sweden, which the Allies were attempting to cut off by unilaterally mining neutral Norwegian waters.[82] Denmark capitulated after a few hours, and despite Allied support, during which the important harbour of Narvik temporarily was recaptured by the British, Norway was conquered within two months.[83] British discontent over the Norwegian campaign led to the replacement of the British Prime Minister, Neville Chamberlain, with Winston Churchill on 10 May 1940.[84]

Germany launched an offensive against France and, for reasons of military strategy, also attacked the neutral nations of Belgium, the Netherlands, and Luxembourg on 10 May 1940.[85] That same day the United Kingdom occupied the Danish possessions of Iceland, Greenland and the Faroes to preempt a possible German invasion of the islands.[86] The Netherlands and Belgium were overrun using blitzkrieg tactics in a few days and weeks, respectively.[87] The French-fortified Maginot Line and the main body the Allied forces which had moved into Belgium were circumvented by a flanking movement through the thickly wooded Ardennes region,[88] mistakenly perceived by Allied planners as an impenetrable natural barrier against armoured vehicles.[89] As a result, the bulk of the Allied armies found themselves trapped in an encirclement and were beaten. The majority were taken prisoner, whilst over 300,000, mostly British and French, were evacuated from the continent at Dunkirk by early June, although abandoning almost all of their equipment.[90]

On 10 June, Italy invaded France, declaring war on both France and the United Kingdom.[91] Paris fell to the Germans on 14 June and eight days later France surrendered and was soon divided into German and Italian occupation zones,[92] and an unoccupied rump state under the Vichy Regime, which, though officially neutral, was generally aligned with Germany. France kept its fleet but the British feared the Germans would seize it, so on 3 July, the British attacked it.[93]
View of London after the German "Blitz", 29 December 1940

On 19 July, Hitler again publicly offered to end the war, saying he had no desire to destroy the British Empire. The United Kingdom rejected this, with Lord Halifax responding "there was in his speech no suggestion that peace must be based on justice, no word of recognition that the other nations of Europe had any right to self‑determination ..."[94]

Following this, Germany began an air superiority campaign over the United Kingdom (the Battle of Britain) to prepare for an invasion.[95] The campaign failed, and the invasion plans were cancelled by September.[95] Frustrated, and in part in response to repeated British air raids against Berlin, Germany began a strategic bombing offensive against British cities known as the Blitz.[96] However, the air attacks largely failed to disrupt the British war effort.
German Luftwaffe, Heinkel He 111 bombers during the Battle of Britain

Using newly captured French ports, the German Navy enjoyed success against an over-extended Royal Navy, using U-boats against British shipping in the Atlantic.[97] The British scored a significant victory on 27 May 1941 by sinking the German battleship Bismarck.[98] Perhaps most importantly, during the Battle of Britain the Royal Air Force had successfully resisted the Luftwaffe's assault, and the German bombing campaign largely ended in May 1941.[99]

Throughout this period, the neutral United States took measures to assist China and the Western Allies. In November 1939, the American Neutrality Act was amended to allow "cash and carry" purchases by the Allies.[100] In 1940, following the German capture of Paris, the size of the United States Navy was significantly increased. In September, the United States further agreed to a trade of American destroyers for British bases.[101] Still, a large majority of the American public continued to oppose any direct military intervention into the conflict well into 1941.[102]

Although Roosevelt had promised to keep the United States out of the war, he nevertheless took concrete steps to prepare for war. In December 1940 he accused Hitler of planning world conquest and ruled out negotiations as useless, calling for the US to become an "arsenal for democracy" and promoted the passage of Lend-Lease aid to support the British war effort.[94] In January 1941 secret high level staff talks with the British began for the purposes of determining how to defeat Germany should the US enter the war. They decided on a number of offensive policies, including an air offensive, the "early elimination" of Italy, raids, support of resistance groups, and the capture of positions to launch an offensive against Germany.[103]

At the end of September 1940, the Tripartite Pact united Japan, Italy and Germany to formalise the Axis Powers. The Tripartite Pact stipulated that any country, with the exception of the Soviet Union, not in the war which attacked any Axis Power would be forced to go to war against all three.[104] The Axis expanded in November 1940 when Hungary, Slovakia and Romania joined the Tripartite Pact.[105] Romania would make a major contribution (as did Hungary) to the Axis war against the USSR, partially to recapture territory ceded to the USSR, partially to pursue its leader Ion Antonescu's desire to combat communism.[106]
Mediterranean (1940–41)
Australian troops of the British Commonwealth Forces man a front-line trench during the Siege of Tobruk; North African Campaign, August 1941

Italy began operations in the Mediterranean, initiating a siege of Malta in June, conquering British Somaliland in August, and making an incursion into British-held Egypt in September 1940. In October 1940, Italy started the Greco-Italian War due to Mussolini's jealousy of Hitler's success but within days was repulsed and pushed back into Albania, where a stalemate soon occurred.[107] The United Kingdom responded to Greek requests for assistance by sending troops to Crete and providing air support to Greece. Hitler decided that when the weather improved he would take action against Greece to assist the Italians and prevent the British from gaining a foothold in the Balkans, to strike against the British naval dominance of the Mediterranean, and to secure his hold on Romanian oil.[108]

In December 1940, British Commonwealth forces began counter-offensives against Italian forces in Egypt and Italian East Africa.[109] The offensive in North Africa was highly successful and by early February 1941 Italy had lost control of eastern Libya and large numbers of Italian troops had been taken prisoner. The Italian Navy also suffered significant defeats, with the Royal Navy putting three Italian battleships out of commission by a carrier attack at Taranto, and neutralising several more warships at the Battle of Cape Matapan.[110]

The Germans soon intervened to assist Italy. Hitler sent German forces to Libya in February, and by the end of March they had launched an offensive which drove back the Commonwealth forces which had been weakened to support Greece.[111] In under a month, Commonwealth forces were pushed back into Egypt with the exception of the besieged port of Tobruk.[112] The Commonwealth attempted to dislodge Axis forces in May and again in June, but failed on both occasions.[113]

By late March 1941, following Bulgaria's signing of the Tripartite Pact, the Germans were in position to intervene in Greece. Plans were changed, however, due to developments in neighbouring Yugoslavia. The Yugoslav government had signed the Tripartite Pact on 25 March, only to be overthrown two days later by a British-encouraged coup. Hitler viewed the new regime as hostile and immediately decided to eliminate it. On 6 April Germany simultaneously invaded both Yugoslavia and Greece, making rapid progress and forcing both nations to surrender within the month. The British were driven from the Balkans after Germany conquered the Greek island of Crete by the end of May.[114] Although the Axis victory was swift, bitter partisan warfare subsequently broke out against the Axis occupation of Yugoslavia, which continued until the end of the war.

The Allies did have some successes during this time. In the Middle East, Commonwealth forces first quashed an uprising in Iraq which had been supported by German aircraft from bases within Vichy-controlled Syria,[115] then, with the assistance of the Free French, invaded Syria and Lebanon to prevent further such occurrences.[116]
Axis attack on the USSR (1941)
Further information: Operation Barbarossa, Einsatzgruppen, World War II casualties of the Soviet Union and Nazi crimes against Soviet POWs
Animation of the WWII European Theatre
Soviet civilians in Leningrad leaving destroyed houses, after a German bombardment of the city; Battle of Leningrad, 10 December 1942

With the situation in Europe and Asia relatively stable, Germany, Japan, and the Soviet Union made preparations. With the Soviets wary of mounting tensions with Germany and the Japanese planning to take advantage of the European War by seizing resource-rich European possessions in Southeast Asia, the two powers signed the Soviet–Japanese Neutrality Pact in April 1941.[117] By contrast, the Germans were steadily making preparations for an attack on the Soviet Union, massing forces on the Soviet border.[118]

Hitler believed that Britain's refusal to end the war was based on the hope that the United States and the Soviet Union would enter the war against Germany sooner or later.[119] He therefore decided to try to strengthen Germany's relations with the Soviets, or failing that, to attack and eliminate them as a factor. In November 1940, negotiations took place to determine if the Soviet Union would join the Tripartite Pact. The Soviets showed some interest, but asked for concessions from Finland, Bulgaria, Turkey, and Japan that Germany considered unacceptable. On 18 December 1940, Hitler issued the directive to prepare for an invasion of the Soviet Union.

On 22 June 1941, Germany, supported by Italy and Romania, invaded the Soviet Union in Operation Barbarossa, with Germany accusing the Soviets of plotting against them. They were joined shortly by Finland and Hungary.[120] The primary targets of this surprise offensive[121] were the Baltic region, Moscow and Ukraine, with the ultimate goal of ending the 1941 campaign near the Arkhangelsk-Astrakhan line, from the Caspian to the White Seas. Hitler's objectives were to eliminate the Soviet Union as a military power, exterminate Communism, generate Lebensraum ("living space")[122] by dispossessing the native population[123] and guarantee access to the strategic resources needed to defeat Germany's remaining rivals.[124]

Although the Red Army was preparing for strategic counter-offensives before the war,[125] Barbarossa forced the Soviet supreme command to adopt a strategic defence. During the summer, the Axis made significant gains into Soviet territory, inflicting immense losses in both personnel and materiel. By the middle of August, however, the German Army High Command decided to suspend the offensive of a considerably depleted Army Group Centre, and to divert the 2nd Panzer Group to reinforce troops advancing towards central Ukraine and Leningrad.[126] The Kiev offensive was overwhelmingly successful, resulting in encirclement and elimination of four Soviet armies, and made further advance into Crimea and industrially developed Eastern Ukraine (the First Battle of Kharkov) possible.[127]

The diversion of three quarters of the Axis troops and the majority of their air forces from France and the central Mediterranean to the Eastern Front[128] prompted Britain to reconsider its grand strategy.[129] In July, the UK and the Soviet Union formed a military alliance against Germany[130] The British and Soviets invaded Iran to secure the Persian Corridor and Iran's oil fields.[131] In August, the United Kingdom and the United States jointly issued the Atlantic Charter.[132]

By October Axis operational objectives in Ukraine and the Baltic region were achieved, with only the sieges of Leningrad[133] and Sevastopol continuing.[134] A major offensive against Moscow was renewed; after two months of fierce battles in increasingly harsh weather the German army almost reached the outer suburbs of Moscow, where the exhausted troops[135] were forced to suspend their offensive.[136] Large territorial gains were made by Axis forces, but their campaign had failed to achieve its main objectives: two key cities remained in Soviet hands, the Soviet capability to resist was not broken, and the Soviet Union retained a considerable part of its military potential. The blitzkrieg phase of the war in Europe had ended.[137]

By early December, freshly mobilised reserves[138] allowed the Soviets to achieve numerical parity with Axis troops.[139] This, as well as intelligence data which established that a minimal number of Soviet troops in the East would be sufficient to deter any attack by the Japanese Kwantung Army,[140] allowed the Soviets to begin a massive counter-offensive that started on 5 December all along the front and pushed German troops 100–250 kilometres (62–155 mi) west.[141]
War breaks out in the Pacific (1941)
Mitsubishi A6M2, "Zero" fighters on the Imperial Japanese Navy aircraft carrier Shōkaku, just before the attack on Pearl Harbor

In 1939 the United States had renounced its trade treaty with Japan and beginning with an aviation gasoline ban in July 1940 Japan had become subject to increasing economic pressure.[94] During this time, Japan launched its first attack against Changsha, a strategically important Chinese city, but was repulsed by late September.[142] Despite several offensives by both sides, the war between China and Japan was stalemated by 1940. To increase pressure on China by blocking supply routes, and to better position Japanese forces in the event of a war with the Western powers, Japan had occupied northern Indochina.[143] Afterwards, the United States embargoed iron, steel and mechanical parts against Japan.[144] Other sanctions soon followed.

In August of that year, Chinese communists launched an offensive in Central China; in retaliation, Japan instituted harsh measures in occupied areas to reduce human and material resources for the communists.[145] Continued antipathy between Chinese communist and nationalist forces culminated in armed clashes in January 1941, effectively ending their co-operation.[146] In March, the Japanese 11th army attacked the headquarters of the Chinese 19th army but was repulsed during Battle of Shanggao.[147] In September, Japan attempted to take the city of Changsha again and clashed with Chinese nationalist forces.[148]

German successes in Europe encouraged Japan to increase pressure on European governments in Southeast Asia. The Dutch government agreed to provide Japan some oil supplies from the Dutch East Indies, but negotiations for additional access to their resources ended in failure in June 1941.[149] In July 1941 Japan sent troops to southern Indochina, thus threatening British and Dutch possessions in the Far East. The United States, United Kingdom and other Western governments reacted to this move with a freeze on Japanese assets and a total oil embargo.[150][151]

Since early 1941 the United States and Japan had been engaged in negotiations in an attempt to improve their strained relations and end the war in China. During these negotiations Japan advanced a number of proposals which were dismissed by the Americans as inadequate.[152] At the same time the US, Britain, and the Netherlands engaged in secret discussions for the joint defence of their territories, in the event of a Japanese attack against any of them.[153] Roosevelt reinforced the Philippines (an American possession since 1898) and warned Japan that the US would react to Japanese attacks against any "neighboring countries".[153]
USS Arizona during the Japanese surprise air attack on the American pacific fleet, 7 December 1941

Frustrated at the lack of progress and feeling the pinch of the American-British-Dutch sanctions, Japan prepared for war. On 20 November it presented an interim proposal as its final offer. It called for the end of American aid to China and the supply of oil and other resources to Japan. In exchange they promised not to launch any attacks in Southeast Asia and to withdraw their forces from their threatening positions in southern Indochina.[152] The American counter-proposal of 26 November required that Japan evacuate all of China without conditions and conclude non-aggression pacts with all Pacific powers.[154] That meant Japan was essentially forced to choose between abandoning its ambitions in China, or seizing the natural resources it needed in the Dutch East Indies by force;[155] the Japanese military did not consider the former an option, and many officers considered the oil embargo an unspoken declaration of war.[156]

Japan planned to rapidly seize European colonies in Asia to create a large defensive perimeter stretching into the Central Pacific; the Japanese would then be free to exploit the resources of Southeast Asia while exhausting the over-stretched Allies by fighting a defensive war.[157] To prevent American intervention while securing the perimeter it was further planned to neutralise the United States Pacific Fleet and the American military presence in the Philippines from the outset.[158] On 7 December (8 December in Asian time zones), 1941, Japan attacked British and American holdings with near-simultaneous offensives against Southeast Asia and the Central Pacific.[159] These included an attack on the American fleet at Pearl Harbor, landings in Thailand and Malaya[159] and the battle of Hong Kong.

These attacks led the United States, Britain, China, Australia and several other states to formally declare war on Japan, whereas the Soviet Union, being heavily involved in large-scale hostilities with European Axis countries, preferred to maintain its neutrality agreement with Japan.[160] Germany, followed by the other Axis states, declared war on the United States in solidarity with Japan, citing as justification the American attacks on German submarines and merchant ships that had been ordered by Roosevelt.[120]
Axis advance stalls (1942–43)
Seated at the Casablanca Conference; US President Franklin D. Roosevelt and British PM Winston Churchill, January 1943

In January 1942, the United States, Britain, Soviet Union, China, and 22 smaller or exiled governments issued the Declaration by United Nations, thereby affirming the Atlantic Charter,[161] and agreeing to not to sign separate peace with the Axis powers.

During 1942, Allied officials debated on the appropriate grand strategy to pursue. All agreed that defeating Germany was the primary objective. The Americans favoured a straightforward, large-scale attack on Germany through France. The Soviets were also demanding a second front. The British, on the other hand, argued that military operations should target peripheral areas to throw a "ring" around Germany which would wear out German strength, lead to increasing demoralisation, and bolster resistance forces. Germany itself would be subject to a heavy bombing campaign. An offensive against Germany would then be launched primarily by Allied armour without using large-scale armies.[162] Eventually, the British persuaded the Americans that a landing in France was infeasible in 1942 and they should instead focus on driving the Axis out of North Africa.[163]

At the Casablanca Conference in early 1943, the Allies issued a declaration declaring that they would not negotiate with their enemies and demanded their unconditional surrender. The British and Americans agreed to continue to press the initiative in the Mediterranean by invading Sicily to fully secure the Mediterranean supply routes.[164] Although the British argued for further operations in the Balkans to bring Turkey into the war, in May 1943, the Americans extracted a British commitment to limit Allied operations in the Mediterranean to an invasion of the Italian mainland and to invade France in 1944.[165]
Pacific (1942–43)
Map of Japanese military advances, until mid-1942

By the end of April 1942, Japan and its ally Thailand had almost fully conquered Burma, Malaya, the Dutch East Indies, Singapore, and Rabaul, inflicting severe losses on Allied troops and taking a large number of prisoners.[166] Despite stubborn resistance at Corregidor, the US possession of the Philippines was eventually captured in May 1942, forcing its government into exile.[167] On 16 April, in Burma, 7,000 British soldiers were encircled by the Japanese 33rd Division during the Battle of Yenangyaung and rescued by the Chinese 38th Division.[168] Japanese forces also achieved naval victories in the South China Sea, Java Sea and Indian Ocean,[169] and bombed the Allied naval base at Darwin, Australia. The only real Allied success against Japan was a Chinese victory at Changsha in early January 1942.[170] These easy victories over unprepared opponents left Japan overconfident, as well as overextended.[171]

In early May 1942, Japan initiated operations to capture Port Moresby by amphibious assault and thus sever communications and supply lines between the United States and Australia. The Allies, however, prevented the invasion by intercepting and defeating the Japanese naval forces in the Battle of the Coral Sea.[172] Japan's next plan, motivated by the earlier Doolittle Raid, was to seize Midway Atoll and lure American carriers into battle to be eliminated; as a diversion, Japan would also send forces to occupy the Aleutian Islands in Alaska.[173] In early June, Japan put its operations into action but the Americans, having broken Japanese naval codes in late May, were fully aware of the plans and force dispositions and used this knowledge to achieve a decisive victory at Midway over the Imperial Japanese Navy.[174]
US Marines during the Guadalcanal Campaign, in the Pacific theatre, 1942

With its capacity for aggressive action greatly diminished as a result of the Midway battle, Japan chose to focus on a belated attempt to capture Port Moresby by an overland campaign in the Territory of Papua.[175] The Americans planned a counter-attack against Japanese positions in the southern Solomon Islands, primarily Guadalcanal, as a first step towards capturing Rabaul, the main Japanese base in Southeast Asia.[176]

Both plans started in July, but by mid-September, the Battle for Guadalcanal took priority for the Japanese, and troops in New Guinea were ordered to withdraw from the Port Moresby area to the northern part of the island, where they faced Australian and United States troops in the Battle of Buna-Gona.[177] Guadalcanal soon became a focal point for both sides with heavy commitments of troops and ships in the battle for Guadalcanal. By the start of 1943, the Japanese were defeated on the island and withdrew their troops.[178] In Burma, Commonwealth forces mounted two operations. The first, an offensive into the Arakan region in late 1942, went disastrously, forcing a retreat back to India by May 1943.[179] The second was the insertion of irregular forces behind Japanese front-lines in February which, by the end of April, had achieved mixed results.[180]
Eastern Front (1942–43)
Red Army soldiers on the counterattack, during the Battle of Stalingrad, February 1943

Despite considerable losses, in early 1942 Germany and its allies stopped a major Soviet offensive in central and southern Russia, keeping most territorial gains they had achieved during the previous year.[181] In May the Germans defeated Soviet offensives in the Kerch Peninsula and at Kharkiv,[182] and then launched their main summer offensive against southern Russia in June 1942, to seize the oil fields of the Caucasus and occupy Kuban steppe, while maintaining positions on the northern and central areas of the front. The Germans split Army Group South into two groups: Army Group A advanced to the lower Don River and struck south-east to the Caucasus, while Army Group B headed towards the Volga River. The Soviets decided to make their stand at Stalingrad on the Volga.[183]

By mid-November, the Germans had nearly taken Stalingrad in bitter street fighting when the Soviets began their second winter counter-offensive, starting with an encirclement of German forces at Stalingrad[184] and an assault on the Rzhev salient near Moscow, though the latter failed disastrously.[185] By early February 1943, the German Army had taken tremendous losses; German troops at Stalingrad had been forced to surrender,[186] and the front-line had been pushed back beyond its position before the summer offensive. In mid-February, after the Soviet push had tapered off, the Germans launched another attack on Kharkiv, creating a salient in their front line around the Russian city of Kursk.[187]
Western Europe/Atlantic & Mediterranean (1942–43)
An American B-17 bombing raid, by the 8th Air Force, on the Focke Wulf factory in Germany, 9 October 1943

Exploiting poor American naval command decisions, the German navy ravaged Allied shipping off the American Atlantic coast.[188] By November 1941, Commonwealth forces had launched a counter-offensive, Operation Crusader, in North Africa, and reclaimed all the gains the Germans and Italians had made.[189] In North Africa, the Germans launched an offensive in January, pushing the British back to positions at the Gazala Line by early February,[190] followed by a temporary lull in combat which Germany used to prepare for their upcoming offensives.[191] Concerns the Japanese might use bases in Vichy-held Madagascar caused the British to invade the island in early May 1942.[192] An Axis offensive in Libya forced an Allied retreat deep inside Egypt until Axis forces were stopped at El Alamein.[193] On the Continent, raids of Allied commandos on strategic targets, culminating in the disastrous Dieppe Raid,[194] demonstrated the Western Allies' inability to launch an invasion of continental Europe without much better preparation, equipment, and operational security.[195]

In August 1942, the Allies succeeded in repelling a second attack against El Alamein[196] and, at a high cost, managed to deliver desperately needed supplies to the besieged Malta.[197] A few months later, the Allies commenced an attack of their own in Egypt, dislodging the Axis forces and beginning a drive west across Libya.[198] This attack was followed up shortly after by Anglo-American landings in French North Africa, which resulted in the region joining the Allies.[199] Hitler responded to the French colony's defection by ordering the occupation of Vichy France;[199] although Vichy forces did not resist this violation of the armistice, they managed to scuttle their fleet to prevent its capture by German forces.[200] The now pincered Axis forces in Africa withdrew into Tunisia, which was conquered by the Allies in May 1943.[201]

In early 1943 the British and Americans began the "Combined Bomber Offensive", a strategic bombing campaign against Germany. The goals were to disrupt the German war economy, reduce German morale, and "de-house" the German civilian population.[202]
Allies gain momentum (1943–44)
US Navy Douglas SBD Dauntless flies patrol over the USS Washington and USS Lexington during the Gilbert and Marshall Islands campaign, 1943

Following the Guadalcanal Campaign, the Allies initiated several operations against Japan in the Pacific. In May 1943, Allied forces were sent to eliminate Japanese forces from the Aleutians,[203] and soon after began major operations to isolate Rabaul by capturing surrounding islands, and to breach the Japanese Central Pacific perimeter at the Gilbert and Marshall Islands.[204] By the end of March 1944, the Allies had completed both of these objectives, and additionally neutralised the major Japanese base at Truk in the Caroline Islands. In April, the Allies then launched an operation to retake Western New Guinea.[205]

In the Soviet Union, both the Germans and the Soviets spent the spring and early summer of 1943 making preparations for large offensives in central Russia. On 4 July 1943, Germany attacked Soviet forces around the Kursk Bulge. Within a week, German forces had exhausted themselves against the Soviets' deeply echeloned and well-constructed defences[206] and, for the first time in the war, Hitler cancelled the operation before it had achieved tactical or operational success.[207] This decision was partially affected by the Western Allies' invasion of Sicily launched on 9 July which, combined with previous Italian failures, resulted in the ousting and arrest of Mussolini later that month.[208] Also, in July 1943 the British firebombed Hamburg killing over 40,000 people.
Red Army troops following T-34 tanks, in a counter-offensive on German positions, at the Battle of Kursk, August 1943

On 12 July 1943, the Soviets launched their own counter-offensives, thereby dispelling any hopes of the German Army for victory or even stalemate in the east. The Soviet victory at Kursk marked the end of German superiority,[209] giving the Soviet Union the initiative on the Eastern Front.[210][211] The Germans attempted to stabilise their eastern front along the hastily fortified Panther-Wotan line, however, the Soviets broke through it at Smolensk and by the Lower Dnieper Offensives.[212]

On 3 September 1943, the Western Allies invaded the Italian mainland, following an Italian armistice with the Allies.[213] Germany responded by disarming Italian forces, seizing military control of Italian areas,[214] and creating a series of defensive lines.[215] German special forces then rescued Mussolini, who then soon established a new client state in German occupied Italy named the Italian Social Republic,[216] causing an Italian civil war. The Western Allies fought through several lines until reaching the main German defensive line in mid-November.[217]

German operations in the Atlantic also suffered. By May 1943, as Allied counter-measures became increasingly effective, the resulting sizeable German submarine losses forced a temporary halt of the German Atlantic naval campaign.[218] In November 1943, Franklin D. Roosevelt and Winston Churchill met with Chiang Kai-shek in Cairo and then with Joseph Stalin in Tehran.[219] The former conference determined the post-war return of Japanese territory,[220] while the latter included agreement that the Western Allies would invade Europe in 1944 and that the Soviet Union would declare war on Japan within three months of Germany's defeat.[221]
Ruins of the Benedictine monastery, during the Battle of Monte Cassino; Italian Campaign, May 1944

From November 1943, during the seven-week Battle of Changde, the Chinese forced Japan to fight a costly war of attrition, while awaiting Allied relief.[222][223][224] In January 1944, the Allies launched a series of attacks in Italy against the line at Monte Cassino and attempted to outflank it with landings at Anzio.[225] By the end of January, a major Soviet offensive expelled German forces from the Leningrad region,[226] ending the longest and most lethal siege in history.

The following Soviet offensive was halted on the pre-war Estonian border by the German Army Group North aided by Estonians hoping to re-establish national independence. This delay slowed subsequent Soviet operations in the Baltic Sea region.[227] By late May 1944, the Soviets had liberated Crimea, largely expelled Axis forces from Ukraine, and made incursions into Romania, which were repulsed by the Axis troops.[228] The Allied offensives in Italy had succeeded and, at the expense of allowing several German divisions to retreat, on 4 June, Rome was captured.[229]

The Allies experienced mixed fortunes in mainland Asia. In March 1944, the Japanese launched the first of two invasions, an operation against British positions in Assam, India,[230] and soon besieged Commonwealth positions at Imphal and Kohima.[231] In May 1944, British forces mounted a counter-offensive that drove Japanese troops back to Burma,[231] and Chinese forces that had invaded northern Burma in late 1943 besieged Japanese troops in Myitkyina.[232] The second Japanese invasion of China attempted to destroy China's main fighting forces, secure railways between Japanese-held territory and capture Allied airfields.[233] By June, the Japanese had conquered the province of Henan and begun a renewed attack against Changsha in the Hunan province.[234]
Allies close in (1944)
American troops approaching Omaha Beach, during the Invasion of Normandy on D-Day, 6 June 1944

On 6 June 1944 (known as D-Day), after three years of Soviet pressure,[235] the Western Allies invaded northern France. After reassigning several Allied divisions from Italy, they also attacked southern France.[236] These landings were successful, and led to the defeat of the German Army units in France. Paris was liberated by the local resistance assisted by the Free French Forces, both led by General Charles de Gaulle, on 25 August[237] and the Western Allies continued to push back German forces in western Europe during the latter part of the year. An attempt to advance into northern Germany spearheaded by a major airborne operation in the Netherlands ended with a failure.[238] After that, the Western Allies slowly pushed into Germany, unsuccessfully trying to cross the Rur river in a large offensive. In Italy the Allied advance also slowed down, when they ran into the last major German defensive line.[239]

On 22 June, the Soviets launched a strategic offensive in Belarus (known as "Operation Bagration") that resulted in the almost complete destruction of the German Army Group Centre.[240] Soon after that, another Soviet strategic offensive forced German troops from Western Ukraine and Eastern Poland. The successful advance of Soviet troops prompted resistance forces in Poland to initiate several uprisings. Though, the largest of these in Warsaw, where German soldiers massacred 200,000 civilians, as well as a national Slovak Uprising in the south did not receive Soviet support, and were put down by German forces.[241] The Red Army's strategic offensive in eastern Romania cut off and destroyed the considerable German troops there and triggered a successful coup d'état in Romania and in Bulgaria, followed by those countries' shift to the Allied side.[242]
German SS soldiers from the Dirlewanger Brigade, tasked with suppressing partisan uprisings against Nazi occupation, August 1944

In September 1944, Soviet Red Army troops advanced into Yugoslavia and forced the rapid withdrawal of the German Army Groups E and F in Greece, Albania and Yugoslavia to rescue them from being cut off.[243] By this point, the Communist-led Partisans under Marshal Josip Broz Tito, who had led an increasingly successful guerrilla campaign against the occupation since 1941, controlled much of the territory of Yugoslavia and were engaged in delaying efforts against the German forces further south. In northern Serbia, the Red Army, with limited support from Bulgarian forces, assisted the Partisans in a joint liberation of the capital city of Belgrade on 20 October. A few days later, the Soviets launched a massive assault against German-occupied Hungary that lasted until the fall of Budapest in February 1945.[244] In contrast with impressive Soviet victories in the Balkans, the bitter Finnish resistance to the Soviet offensive in the Karelian Isthmus denied the Soviets occupation of Finland and led to the signing of Soviet-Finnish armistice on relatively mild conditions,[245][246] with a subsequent shift to the Allied side by Finland.

By the start of July, Commonwealth forces in Southeast Asia had repelled the Japanese sieges in Assam, pushing the Japanese back to the Chindwin River[247] while the Chinese captured Myitkyina. In China, the Japanese were having greater successes, having finally captured Changsha in mid-June and the city of Hengyang by early August.[248] Soon after, they further invaded the province of Guangxi, winning major engagements against Chinese forces at Guilin and Liuzhou by the end of November[249] and successfully linking up their forces in China and Indochina by the middle of December.[250]

In the Pacific, American forces continued to press back the Japanese perimeter. In mid-June 1944 they began their offensive against the Mariana and Palau islands, and decisively defeated Japanese forces in the Battle of the Philippine Sea. These defeats led to the resignation of the Japanese Prime Minister, Hideki Tojo, and provided the United States with air bases to launch intensive heavy bomber attacks on the Japanese home islands. In late October, American forces invaded the Filipino island of Leyte; soon after, Allied naval forces scored another large victory during the Battle of Leyte Gulf, one of the largest naval battles in history.[251]
Axis collapse, Allied victory (1944–45)
Yalta Conference held in February 1945, with Winston Churchill, Franklin D. Roosevelt and Joseph Stalin

On 16 December 1944, Germany attempted its last desperate measure for success on the Western Front by using most of its remaining reserves to launch a massive counter-offensive in the Ardennes to attempt to split the Western Allies, encircle large portions of Western Allied troops and capture their primary supply port at Antwerp to prompt a political settlement.[252] By January, the offensive had been repulsed with no strategic objectives fulfilled.[252] In Italy, the Western Allies remained stalemated at the German defensive line. In mid-January 1945, the Soviets and Poles attacked in Poland, pushing from the Vistula to the Oder river in Germany, and overran East Prussia.[253] On 4 February, US, British, and Soviet leaders met for the Yalta Conference. They agreed on the occupation of post-war Germany, and on when the Soviet Union would join the war against Japan.[254]

In February, the Soviets entered Silesia and Pomerania, while Western Allies entered western Germany and closed to the Rhine river. By March, the Western Allies crossed the Rhine north and south of the Ruhr, encircling the German Army Group B,[255] while the Soviets advanced to Vienna. In early April, the Western Allies finally pushed forward in Italy and swept across western Germany, while Soviet and Polish forces stormed Berlin in late April. The American and Soviet forces linked up on Elbe river on 25 April. On 30 April 1945, the Reichstag was captured, signalling the military defeat of the Third Reich.[256]

Several changes in leadership occurred during this period. On 12 April, President Roosevelt died and was succeeded by Harry Truman. Benito Mussolini was killed by Italian partisans on 28 April.[257] Two days later, Hitler committed suicide, and was succeeded by Grand Admiral Karl Dönitz.[258]
The German Reichstag after its capture by the Allies, 3 June 1945

German forces surrendered in Italy on 29 April. Total and unconditional surrender was signed on 7 May, to be effective by the end of 8 May.[259] German Army Group Centre resisted in Prague until 11 May.[260]

In the Pacific theatre, American forces accompanied by the forces of the Philippine Commonwealth advanced in the Philippines, clearing Leyte by the end of April 1945. They landed on Luzon in January 1945 and captured Manila in March following a battle which reduced the city to ruins. Fighting continued on Luzon, Mindanao, and other islands of the Philippines until the end of the war.[261] On the night of 9–10 March, B-29 bombers of the US Army Air Forces struck Tokyo with incendiary bombs, which killed 100,000 people within a few hours. Over the next five months, American bombers firebombed 66 other Japanese cities, causing the destruction of untold numbers of buildings and the deaths of between 350,000–500,000 Japanese civilians.[262]
Japanese foreign affairs minister Mamoru Shigemitsu signs the Japanese Instrument of Surrender on board the USS Missouri, 2 September 1945

In May 1945, Australian troops landed in Borneo, over-running the oilfields there. British, American, and Chinese forces defeated the Japanese in northern Burma in March, and the British pushed on to reach Rangoon by 3 May.[263] Chinese forces started to counterattack in Battle of West Hunan that occurred between 6 April and 7 June 1945. American forces also moved towards Japan, taking Iwo Jima by March, and Okinawa by the end of June.[264] At the same time American bombers were destroying Japanese cities, American submarines cut off Japanese imports, drastically reducing Japan's ability to supply its overseas forces.[265]

On 11 July, Allied leaders met in Potsdam, Germany. They confirmed earlier agreements about Germany,[266] and reiterated the demand for unconditional surrender of all Japanese forces by Japan, specifically stating that "the alternative for Japan is prompt and utter destruction".[267] During this conference, the United Kingdom held its general election, and Clement Attlee replaced Churchill as Prime Minister.[268]

As Japan continued to ignore the Potsdam terms issued to them on 27 July, the United States dropped atomic bombs on the Japanese cities of Hiroshima and Nagasaki in early August. Like the Japanese cities previously bombed by American airmen, the US and its allies justified the atomic bombings as military necessity to avoid invading the Japanese home islands which would cost the lives of between 250,000–500,000 Allied troops and millions of Japanese troops and civilians.[269] Between the two bombings, the Soviets, pursuant to the Yalta agreement, invaded Japanese-held Manchuria, and quickly defeated the Kwantung Army, which was the largest Japanese fighting force.[270][271] The Red Army also captured Sakhalin Island and the Kuril Islands. On 15 August 1945, Japan surrendered, with the surrender documents finally signed aboard the deck of the American battleship USS Missouri on 2 September 1945, ending the war.[272]
Aftermath
Main articles: Aftermath of World War II and Consequences of Nazism
Ruins of Warsaw in January 1945, after the deliberate destruction of the city by the occupying German forces
Post-war Soviet territorial expansion; resulted in Central European border changes, the creation of a Communist Bloc, and start of the Cold War

The Allies established occupation administrations in Austria and Germany. The former became a neutral state, non-aligned with any political bloc. The latter was divided into western and eastern occupation zones controlled by the Western Allies and the USSR, accordingly. A denazification program in Germany led to the prosecution of Nazi war criminals and the removal of ex-Nazis from power, although this policy moved towards amnesty and re-integration of ex-Nazis into West German society.[273]

Germany lost a quarter of its pre-war (1937) territory. Among the eastern territories, Silesia, Neumark and most of Pomerania were taken over by Poland, East Prussia was divided between Poland and the USSR, followed by the expulsion of the 9 million Germans from these provinces, as well as the expulsion of 3 million Germans from the Sudetenland in Czechoslovakia to Germany. By the 1950s, every fifth West German was a refugee from the east. The Soviet Union also took over the Polish provinces east of the Curzon line, from which 2 million Poles were expelled;[274] north-east Romania,[275][276] parts of eastern Finland,[277] and the three Baltic states were also incorporated into the USSR.[278][279]

In an effort to maintain peace,[280] the Allies formed the United Nations, which officially came into existence on 24 October 1945,[281] and adopted the Universal Declaration of Human Rights in 1948, as a common standard for all member nations.[282] The great powers that were the victors of the war—the United States, Soviet Union, China, Britain, and France—formed the permanent members of the UN's Security Council.[7] The five permanent members remain so to the present, although there have been two seat changes, between the Republic of China and the People's Republic of China in 1971, and between the Soviet Union and its successor state, the Russian Federation, following the dissolution of the Soviet Union. The alliance between the Western Allies and the Soviet Union had begun to deteriorate even before the war was over.[283]

Germany had been de facto divided, and two independent states, the Federal Republic of Germany and the German Democratic Republic[284] were created within the borders of Allied and Soviet occupation zones, accordingly. The rest of Europe was also divided into Western and Soviet spheres of influence.[285] Most eastern and central European countries fell into the Soviet sphere, which led to establishment of Communist-led regimes, with full or partial support of the Soviet occupation authorities. As a result, Poland, Hungary, East Germany,[286] Czechoslovakia, Romania, and Albania[287] became Soviet satellite states. Communist Yugoslavia conducted a fully independent policy, causing tension with the USSR.[288]

Post-war division of the world was formalised by two international military alliances, the United States-led NATO and the Soviet-led Warsaw Pact;[289] the long period of political tensions and military competition between them, the Cold War, would be accompanied by an unprecedented arms race and proxy wars.[290]

In Asia, the United States led the occupation of Japan and administrated Japan's former islands in the Western Pacific, while the Soviets annexed Sakhalin and the Kuril Islands.[291] Korea, formerly under Japanese rule, was divided and occupied by the US in the South and the Soviet Union in the North between 1945 and 1948. Separate republics emerged on both sides of the 38th parallel in 1948, each claiming to be the legitimate government for all of Korea, which led ultimately to the Korean War.[292]

In China, nationalist and communist forces resumed the civil war in June 1946. Communist forces were victorious and established the People's Republic of China on the mainland, while nationalist forces retreated to Taiwan in 1949.[293] In the Middle East, the Arab rejection of the United Nations Partition Plan for Palestine and the creation of Israel marked the escalation of the Arab-Israeli conflict. While European colonial powers attempted to retain some or all of their colonial empires, their losses of prestige and resources during the war rendered this unsuccessful, leading to decolonisation.[294][295]

The global economy suffered heavily from the war, although participating nations were affected differently. The US emerged much richer than any other nation; it had a baby boom and by 1950 its gross domestic product per person was much higher than that of any of the other powers and it dominated the world economy.[296] The UK and US pursued a policy of industrial disarmament in Western Germany in the years 1945–1948.[297] Due to international trade interdependencies this led to European economic stagnation and delayed European recovery for several years.[298][299]

Recovery began with the mid-1948 currency reform in Western Germany, and was sped up by the liberalisation of European economic policy that the Marshall Plan (1948–1951) both directly and indirectly caused.[300][301] The post-1948 West German recovery has been called the German economic miracle.[302] Italy also experienced an economic boom[303] and the French economy rebounded.[304] By contrast, the United Kingdom was in a state of economic ruin,[305] and although it received a quarter of the total Marshall Plan assistance, more than any other European country,[306] continued relative economic decline for decades.[307]

The Soviet Union, despite enormous human and material losses, also experienced rapid increase in production in the immediate post-war era.[308] Japan experienced incredibly rapid economic growth, becoming one of the most powerful economies in the world by the 1980s.[309] China returned to its pre-war industrial production by 1952.[310]
Impact
Casualties and war crimes
Main articles: World War II casualties, War crimes during World War II, War crimes in occupied Poland during World War II, German war crimes, War crimes of the Wehrmacht, Japanese war crimes, Allied war crimes during World War II and Soviet war crimes
World War II deaths

Estimates for the total casualties of the war vary, because many deaths went unrecorded. Most suggest that some 75 million people died in the war, including about 20 million military personnel and 40 million civilians.[311][312][313] Many of the civilians died because of deliberate genocide, massacres, mass-bombing, disease, and starvation.

The Soviet Union lost around 27 million people during the war,[314] including 8.7 million military and 19 million civilian deaths. The largest portion of military dead were 5.7 million ethnic Russians, followed by 1.3 million ethnic Ukrainians.[315] A quarter of the people in the Soviet Union were wounded or killed.[316] Germany sustained 5.3 million military losses, mostly on the Eastern Front and during the final battles in Germany.[317]

Of the total deaths in World War II, approximately 85 percent—mostly Soviet and Chinese—were on the Allied side and 15 percent on the Axis side. Many of these deaths were caused by war crimes committed by German and Japanese forces in occupied territories. An estimated 11[318] to 17 million[319] civilians died as a direct or indirect result of Nazi ideological policies, including the systematic genocide of around 6 million Jews during the Holocaust, along with a further 5 to 6 million ethnic Poles and other Slavs (including Ukrainians and Belarusians)[320]—Roma, homosexuals, and other ethnic and minority groups.[319]
Chinese civilians being buried alive by soldiers of the Imperial Japanese Army, during the Nanking Massacre, December 1937

Roughly 7.5 million civilians died in China under Japanese occupation.[321] Hundreds of thousands (varying estimates) of ethnic Serbs, along with gypsies and Jews, were murdered by the Axis-aligned Croatian Ustaše in Yugoslavia,[322] with retribution-related killings of Croatian civilians just after the war ended.

The best-known Japanese atrocity was the Nanking Massacre, in which several hundred thousand Chinese civilians were raped and murdered.[323] Between 3 million to more than 10 million civilians, mostly Chinese, were killed by the Japanese occupation forces.[324] Mitsuyoshi Himeta reported 2.7 million casualties occurred during the Sankō Sakusen. General Yasuji Okamura implemented the policy in Heipei and Shantung.[325]

Axis forces employed biological and chemical weapons. The Imperial Japanese Army used a variety of such weapons during their invasion and occupation of China (see Unit 731)[326][327] and in early conflicts against the Soviets.[328] Both the Germans and Japanese tested such weapons against civilians[329] and, sometimes on prisoners of war.[330]

The Soviet Union was responsible for the Katyn massacre of 22,000 Polish officers,[331] and the imprisonment or execution of thousands of political prisoners by the NKVD,[332] in the Baltic states, and eastern Poland annexed by the Red Army.

The mass-bombing of civilian areas, notably the cities of Warsaw, Rotterdam and London; including the aerial targeting of hospitals and fleeing refugees[333] by the German Luftwaffe, along with the bombing of Tokyo, and German cities of Dresden, Hamburg and Cologne by the Western Allies may be considered as war crimes. The latter resulted in the destruction of more than 160 cities and the deaths of more than 600,000 German civilians.[334] However, no positive or specific customary international humanitarian law with respect to aerial warfare existed before or during World War II.[335]
Concentration camps, slave labour, and genocide
Further information: Genocide, The Holocaust, Nazi concentration camps, Extermination camp, Forced labour under German rule during World War II, Kidnapping of children by Nazi Germany and Nazi human experimentation
Female SS camp guards remove bodies from lorries and carry them to a mass grave, inside the German Bergen-Belsen concentration camp, 1945

The German Government led by Adolf Hitler and the Nazi Party was responsible for the Holocaust, the killing of approximately 6 million Jews (overwhelmingly Ashkenazim), as well as 2.7 million ethnic Poles,[336] and 4 million others who were deemed "unworthy of life" (including the disabled and mentally ill, Soviet prisoners of war, homosexuals, Freemasons, Jehovah's Witnesses, and Romani) as part of a programme of deliberate extermination. About 12 million, most of whom were Eastern Europeans, were employed in the German war economy as forced labourers.[337]

In addition to Nazi concentration camps, the Soviet gulags (labour camps) led to the death of citizens of occupied countries such as Poland, Lithuania, Latvia, and Estonia, as well as German prisoners of war (POWs) and even Soviet citizens who had been or were thought to be supporters of the Nazis.[338] Sixty percent of Soviet POWs of the Germans died during the war.[339] Richard Overy gives the number of 5.7 million Soviet POWs. Of those, 57 percent died or were killed, a total of 3.6 million.[340] Soviet ex-POWs and repatriated civilians were treated with great suspicion as potential Nazi collaborators, and some of them were sent to the Gulag upon being checked by the NKVD.[341]
Prisoner identity photograph taken by the German SS of a fourteen year old Polish girl, sent as forced labour to Auschwitz, December 1942

Japanese prisoner-of-war camps, many of which were used as labour camps, also had high death rates. The International Military Tribunal for the Far East found the death rate of Western prisoners was 27.1 percent (for American POWs, 37 percent),[342] seven times that of POWs under the Germans and Italians.[343] While 37,583 prisoners from the UK, 28,500 from the Netherlands, and 14,473 from the United States were released after the surrender of Japan, the number of Chinese released was only 56.[344]

According to historian Zhifen Ju, at least five million Chinese civilians from northern China and Manchukuo were enslaved between 1935 and 1941 by the East Asia Development Board, or Kōain, for work in mines and war industries. After 1942, the number reached 10 million.[345] The US Library of Congress estimates that in Java, between 4 and 10 million romusha (Japanese: "manual laborers"), were forced to work by the Japanese military. About 270,000 of these Javanese labourers were sent to other Japanese-held areas in South East Asia, and only 52,000 were repatriated to Java.[346]

On 19 February 1942, Roosevelt signed Executive Order 9066, interning about 100,000 Japanese living on the West Coast. Canada had a similar program.[347][348] In addition, 14,000 German and Italian citizens who had been assessed as being security risks were also interned.[349]

In accordance with the Allied agreement made at the Yalta Conference millions of POWs and civilians were used as forced labour by the Soviet Union.[350] In Hungary's case, Hungarians were forced to work for the Soviet Union until 1955.[351]
Occupation
Main articles: German-occupied Europe, Lebensraum, Untermensch, Collaboration with the Axis Powers during World War II, Resistance during World War II and Nazi plunder
Blindfolded Polish citizens just before execution by German soldiers in Palmiry, 1940

In Europe, occupation came under two forms. In Western, Northern and Central Europe (France, Norway, Denmark, the Low Countries, and the annexed portions of Czechoslovakia) Germany established economic policies through which it collected roughly 69.5 billion reichmarks (27.8 billion US Dollars) by the end of the war, this figure does not include the sizeable plunder of industrial products, military equipment, raw materials and other goods.[352] Thus, the income from occupied nations was over 40 percent of the income Germany collected from taxation, a figure which increased to nearly 40 percent of total German income as the war went on.[353]

In the East, the much hoped for bounties of Lebensraum were never attained as fluctuating front-lines and Soviet scorched earth policies denied resources to the German invaders.[354] Unlike in the West, the Nazi racial policy encouraged excessive brutality against what it considered to be the "inferior people" of Slavic descent; most German advances were thus followed by mass executions.[355] Although resistance groups did form in most occupied territories, they did not significantly hamper German operations in either the East[356] or the West[357] until late 1943.

In Asia, Japan termed nations under its occupation as being part of the Greater East Asia Co-Prosperity Sphere, essentially a Japanese hegemony which it claimed was for purposes of liberating colonised peoples.[358] Although Japanese forces were originally welcomed as liberators from European domination in some territories, their excessive brutality turned local public opinion against them within weeks.[359] During Japan's initial conquest it captured 4,000,000 barrels (640,000 m3) of oil (~5.5×105 tonnes) left behind by retreating Allied forces, and by 1943 was able to get production in the Dutch East Indies up to 50 million barrels (~6.8×106 t), 76 percent of its 1940 output rate.[359]
Home fronts and production
Main articles: Military production during World War II and Home front during World War II
Allied to Axis GDP ratio

In Europe, before the outbreak of the war, the Allies had significant advantages in both population and economics. In 1938, the Western Allies (United Kingdom, France, Poland and British Dominions) had a 30 percent larger population and a 30 percent higher gross domestic product than the European Axis (Germany and Italy); if colonies are included, it then gives the Allies more than a 5:1 advantage in population and nearly 2:1 advantage in GDP.[360] In Asia at the same time, China had roughly six times the population of Japan, but only an 89 percent higher GDP; this is reduced to three times the population and only a 38 percent higher GDP if Japanese colonies are included.[360]

Though the Allies' economic and population advantages were largely mitigated during the initial rapid blitzkrieg attacks of Germany and Japan, they became the decisive factor by 1942, after the United States and Soviet Union joined the Allies, as the war largely settled into one of attrition.[361] While the Allies' ability to out-produce the Axis is often attributed to the Allies having more access to natural resources, other factors, such as Germany and Japan's reluctance to employ women in the labour force,[362] Allied strategic bombing,[363] and Germany's late shift to a war economy[364] contributed significantly. Additionally, neither Germany nor Japan planned to fight a protracted war, and were not equipped to do so.[365] To improve their production, Germany and Japan used millions of slave labourers;[366] Germany used about 12 million people, mostly from Eastern Europe,[337] while Japan used more than 18 million people in Far East Asia.[345][346]
Advances in technology and warfare
Main article: Technology during World War II
B-29 Superfortress strategic bombers on the Boeing assembly line in Wichita, Kansas, 1944

Aircraft were used for reconnaissance, as fighters, bombers, and ground-support, and each role was advanced considerably. Innovation included airlift (the capability to quickly move limited high-priority supplies, equipment, and personnel);[367] and of strategic bombing (the bombing of enemy industrial and population centres to destroy the enemy's ability to wage war).[368] Anti-aircraft weaponry also advanced, including defences such as radar and surface-to-air artillery, such as the German 88 mm gun. The use of the jet aircraft was pioneered and, though late introduction meant it had little impact, it led to jets becoming standard in air forces worldwide.[369]

Advances were made in nearly every aspect of naval warfare, most notably with aircraft carriers and submarines. Although aeronautical warfare had relatively little success at the start of the war, actions at Taranto, Pearl Harbor, and the Coral Sea established the carrier as the dominant capital ship in place of the battleship.[370][371][372]

In the Atlantic, escort carriers proved to be a vital part of Allied convoys, increasing the effective protection radius and helping to close the Mid-Atlantic gap.[373] Carriers were also more economical than battleships due to the relatively low cost of aircraft[374] and their not requiring to be as heavily armoured.[375] Submarines, which had proved to be an effective weapon during the First World War,[376] were anticipated by all sides to be important in the second. The British focused development on anti-submarine weaponry and tactics, such as sonar and convoys, while Germany focused on improving its offensive capability, with designs such as the Type VII submarine and wolfpack tactics.[377] Gradually, improving Allied technologies such as the Leigh light, hedgehog, squid, and homing torpedoes proved victorious.
A V-2 rocket launched from a fixed site in Peenemünde, 1943

Land warfare changed from the static front lines of World War I to increased mobility and combined arms. The tank, which had been used predominantly for infantry support in the First World War, had evolved into the primary weapon.[378] In the late 1930s, tank design was considerably more advanced than it had been during World War I,[379] and advances continued throughout the war with increases in speed, armour and firepower.

At the start of the war, most commanders thought enemy tanks should be met by tanks with superior specifications.[380] This idea was challenged by the poor performance of the relatively light early tank guns against armour, and German doctrine of avoiding tank-versus-tank combat. This, along with Germany's use of combined arms, were among the key elements of their highly successful blitzkrieg tactics across Poland and France.[378] Many means of destroying tanks, including indirect artillery, anti-tank guns (both towed and self-propelled), mines, short-ranged infantry antitank weapons, and other tanks were utilised.[380] Even with large-scale mechanisation, infantry remained the backbone of all forces,[381] and throughout the war, most infantry were equipped similarly to World War I.[382]
Nuclear "gadget" being raised to the top of the detonation tower, at Alamogordo Bombing Range; Trinity nuclear test, July 1945

The portable machine gun spread, a notable example being the German MG34, and various submachine guns which were suited to close combat in urban and jungle settings.[382] The assault rifle, a late war development incorporating many features of the rifle and submachine gun, became the standard postwar infantry weapon for most armed forces.[383][384]

Most major belligerents attempted to solve the problems of complexity and security involved in using large codebooks for cryptography by designing ciphering machines, the most well known being the German Enigma machine.[385] Development of SIGINT (signals intelligence) and cryptanalysis enabled the countering process of decryption. Notable examples were the Allied decryption of Japanese naval codes[386] and British Ultra, a pioneering method for decoding Enigma benefiting from information given to Britain by the Polish Cipher Bureau, which had been decoding early versions of Enigma before the war.[387] Another aspect of military intelligence was the use of deception, which the Allies used to great effect, such as in operations Mincemeat and Bodyguard.[386][388] Other technological and engineering feats achieved during, or as a result of, the war include the world's first programmable computers (Z3, Colossus, and ENIAC), guided missiles and modern rockets, the Manhattan Project's development of nuclear weapons, operations research and the development of artificial harbours and oil pipelines under the English Channel.[389]
See also

    Air warfare of World War II
    Aftermath of World War II
    Home front during World War II
    List of World War II battles
    List of World War II conferences
    List of World War II military operations
    World War II in popular culture

Documentaries

    The World Wars (miniseries) The World Wars is a three-part, six hour event miniseries by the History Channel that premiered on Monday, May 26, 2014, (Memorial Day) airing for three consecutive nights. An extended version of the series with never before seen footage was subsequently broadcast on H2 and in more than 160 countries on June 22, 2014
    Apocalypse: The Second World War (2009), a six-part French documentary by Daniel Costelle and Isabelle Clarke about World War II
    Battlefield, a documentary television series initially issued in 1994–5, that explores many important World War II battles
    BBC History of World War II, a television series, initially issued from 1989 to 2005.
    The World at War (1974), a 26-part Thames Television series that covers most aspects of World War II from many points of view. It includes interviews with many key figures including Karl Dönitz, Albert Speer, and Anthony Eden.

Notes

    Various other dates have been proposed as the date on which World War II began or ended.

Citations

Fitzgerald 2011, p. 4
Hedgepeth & Saidel 2010, p. 16
James A. Tyner (March 3, 2009). War, Violence, and Population: Making the Body Count. The Guilford Press; 1 edition. p. 49. ISBN 1-6062-3038-7.
Sommerville 2011, p. 5.
Barrett & Shyu 2001, p. 6.
Axelrod, Alan (2007) Encyclopedia of World War II, Volume 1. Infobase Publishing. pp. 659.
The UN Security Council, retrieved 15 May 2012
Herman Van Rompuy, President of the European Council; José Manuel Durão Barroso, President of the European Commission (10 December 2012). "From War to Peace: A European Tale". Nobel Lecture by the European Union. Retrieved 4 January 2014.
Weinberg, Gerhard L. (2005) A World at Arms: A Global History of World War II (2nd ed.). Cambridge University Press. pp. 6.
Wells, Anne Sharp (2014) Historical Dictionary of World War II: The War against Germany and Italy. Rowman & Littlefield Publishing. pp. 7.
Förster & Gessler 2005, p. 64.
Ghuhl, Wernar (2007) Imperial Japan's World War Two Transaction Publishers pg 7, pg. 30
Polmar, Norman; Thomas B. Allen (1991) World War II: America at war, 1941-1945 ISBN 978-0394585307
Ben-Horin 1943, p. 169; Taylor 1979, p. 124; Yisreelit, Hevrah Mizrahit (1965). Asian and African Studies, p. 191.
For 1941 see Taylor 1961, p. vii; Kellogg, William O (2003). American History the Easy Way. Barron's Educational Series. p. 236 ISBN 0-7641-1973-7.
There is also the viewpoint that both World War I and World War II are part of the same "European Civil War" or "Second Thirty Years War": Canfora 2006, p. 155; Prins 2002, p. 11.
Beevor 2012, p. 10.
Masaya 1990, p. 4.
"History of German-American Relations » 1989–1994 – Reunification » "Two-plus-Four-Treaty": Treaty on the Final Settlement with Respect to Germany, September 12, 1990". usa.usembassy.de. Retrieved 6 May 2012.
Ingram 2006, pp. 76–8
Kantowicz 1999, p. 149.
Davies 2008, pp. 134–140.
Shaw 2000, p. 35.
Bullock 1990, p. 265.
Preston 1998, p. 104.
Myers & Peattie 1987, p. 458.
Smith & Steadman 2004, p. 28.
Coogan 1993: "Although some Chinese troops in the Northeast managed to retreat south, others were trapped by the advancing Japanese Army and were faced with the choice of resistance in defiance of orders, or surrender. A few commanders submitted, receiving high office in the puppet government, but others took up arms against the invader. The forces they commanded were the first of the volunteer armies."
Brody 1999, p. 4.
Dawood & Mitra 2012.
Zalampas 1989, p. 62.
Mandelbaum 1988, p. 96; Record 2005, p. 50.
Schmitz 2000, p. 124.
Andrea L. Stanton, Edward Ramsamy, Peter J. Seybolt. Cultural Sociology of the Middle East, Asia, and Africa: An Encyclopedia. p. 308. Retrieved 2014-04-06.
Kitson 2001, p. 231.
Adamthwaite 1992, p. 52.
Graham 2005, p. 110.
Busky 2002, p. 10.
Barker 1971, pp. 131–2.
Beevor 2006, pp. 258–60.
Tony Judt said that the "communist strategy in Spain turns out to have been a dry run for the seizure of power in Eastern Europe after 1945." See Judt & Snyder 2012, p. 190.
Budiansky 2004, pp. 209–11.
Payne 2008.
Eastman 1986, pp. 547–51.
Levene, Mark and Roberts, Penny. The Massacre in History. 1999, page 223-4
Totten, Samuel. Dictionary of Genocide. 2008, 298–9.
Hsu & Chang 1971, pp. 221–230.
Eastman 1986, p. 566.
Taylor 2009, pp. 150–2.
Sella 1983, pp. 651–87.
Collier & Pedley 2000, p. 144.
Kershaw 2001, pp. 121–2.
Kershaw 2001, p. 157.
Davies 2008, pp. 143–4.
Lowe & Marzari 2002, p. 330.
Dear & Foot 2001, p. 234.
Shore 2003, p. 108.
Dear & Foot 2001, p. 608.
Minutes of the conference between the Fuehrer and the Italian Minister for Foreign Affairs, Count Ciano, in the presence of the Reich Foreign Minister of Obersalzberg on 12 August 1939 in Nazi Conspiracy and Aggression Volume IV Document No. 1871-PS
"The German Campaign In Poland (1939)". Retrieved 29 October 2014.
"Major international events of 1939, with explanation". ibiblio.org. Retrieved 15 May 2013.
Evans 2008, pp. 1–2.
Jackson 2006, p. 58.
Weinberg 2005, pp. 64–5.
Keegan 1997, p. 35.
Cienciala 2010, p. 128, observes that, while it is true that Poland was far away, making it difficult for the French and British to provide support, "[f]ew Western historians of World War II ... know that the British had committed to bomb Germany if it attacked Poland, but did not do so except for one raid on the base of Wilhelmshafen. The French, who committed to attack Germany in the west, had no intention of doing so."
Beevor 2012, p. 32; Dear & Foot 2001, pp. 248–9; Roskill 1954, p. 64.
Zaloga 2002, pp. 80, 83.
Hempel 2005, p. 24.
Zaloga 2002, pp. 88–9.
Budiansky 2001, pp. 120–1.
Nuremberg Documents C-62/GB86, a directive from Hitler in October 1939 which concludes: "The attack [on France] is to be launched this Autumn if conditions are at all possible."
History of the Second World War, B H Liddell Hart, Pan, 1977 p39-40
Hitler: a Study in Tyranny, A Bullock, Penguin, 1983, p563-4, 566, 568–9, 574–5
Blitzkrieg: From the Rise of Hitler to the Fall of Dunkirk, L Deighton, Jonathan Cape, 1993, p186-7. Deighton states that "the offensive was postponed twenty-nine times before it finally took place".
Smith et al. 2002, p. 24
Bilinsky 1999, p. 9.
Murray & Millett 2001, pp. 55–6.
Spring 1986.
Hanhimäki 1997, p. 12.
Ferguson 2006, pp. 367, 376, 379, 417
Snyder 2010, p. 118ff.
Koch 1983.
Roberts 2006, p. 56.
Roberts 2006, p. 59.
Murray & Millett 2001, pp. 57–63.
Commager 2004, p. 9.
Reynolds 2006, p. 76.
Evans 2008, pp. 122–3.
Dear & Foot 2001, p. 436.
The Americans later relieved the British, with marines arriving in Reykjavik on 7 July 1941 (Schofield 1981, p. 122).
Shirer 1990, pp. 721–3.
Keegan 1997, pp. 59–60.
Regan 2004, p. 152.
Keegan 1997, pp. 66–7.
Overy & Wheatcroft 1999, p. 207.
Umbreit 1991, p. 311.
Brown 2004, p. xxx.
"Major international events of 1940, with explanation". ibiblio.org. Retrieved 15 May 2013.
Kelly, Rees & Shuter 1998, p. 38.
The Battle of Britain: The Last Phase THE DEFENSE OF THE UNITED KINGDOM 1957
Goldstein 2004, p. 35.
Aircraft played a highly important role in defeating the German U-boats (Schofield 1981, p. 122).
Steury 1987, p. 209; Zetterling & Tamelander 2009, p. 282.
Dear & Foot 2001, pp. 108–9.
Overy & Wheatcroft 1999, pp. 328–30.
Maingot 1994, p. 52.
Cantril 1940, p. 390.
Coordination With Britain Chief of Staff: Prewar Plans and Operations
Bilhartz & Elliott 2007, p. 179.
Dear & Foot 2001, p. 877.
Dear & Foot 2001, pp. 745–6.
Clogg 2002, p. 118.
Evans 2008, pp. 146, 152; US Army 1986, pp. 4–6
Jowett 2001, pp. 9–10.
Jackson 2006, p. 106.
Laurier 2001, pp. 7–8.
Murray & Millett 2001, pp. 263–7.
Macksey 1997, pp. 61–3.
Weinberg 2005, p. 229.
Watson 2003, p. 80.
Jackson 2006, p. 154.
Garver 1988, p. 114.
Weinberg 2005, p. 195
Murray 1983, p. 69
Klooz, Marle; Wiley, Evelyn (1944), "1941", Events leading up to World War II: Chronological history of certain major international events leading up to and during World War II with the ostensible reasons advanced for their occurrence — 1931–1944, 78th Congress, 2d Session, Humphrey, Richard A, Washington: United States Government Printing Office, House Document No. 541
Sella 1978.
Kershaw 2007, pp. 66–9.
Steinberg 1995.
Hauner 1978.
Roberts 1995.
Wilt 1981.
Erickson 2003, pp. 114–37.
Glantz 2001, p. 9.
Farrell 1993.
Keeble 1990, p. 29.
Bueno de Mesquita et al. 2003, p. 425
Beevor 2012, p. 220.
Kleinfeld 1983.
Jukes 2001, p. 113.
Glantz 2001, p. 26: "By 1 November [the Wehrmacht] had lost fully 20% of its committed strength (686,000 men), up to 2/3 of its ½-million motor vehicles, and 65 percent of its tanks. The German Army High Command (OKH) rated its 136 divisions as equivalent to 83 full-strength divisions."
Reinhardt 1992, p. 227.
Milward 1964.
Rotundo 1986.
Glantz 2001, p. 26.
Garthoff 1969.
Beevor 1998, pp. 41–2.
Evans 2008, pp. 213–4, notes that "Zhukov had pushed the Germans back to the point from which they had launched Operation Typhoon two months before. ... Only Stalin's decision to attack all along the front instead of pushing home the advantage by concentrating his forces in an all-out assault against the retreating Germany Army Group Centre prevented the disaster from being even worse."
Jowett & Andrew 2002, p. 14.
Overy & Wheatcroft 1999, p. 289
Morison 2002, p. 60.
Joes 2004, p. 224.
Fairbank & Goldman 2006, p. 320.
Hsu & Chang 1971, p. 30.
Hsu & Chang 1971, p. 33.
Japanese Policy and Strategy, 1931 – July 1941 Strategy and Command: The First Two Years
Anderson 1975, p. 201.
Evans & Peattie 2012, p. 456.
The Decision for War Strategy and Command: The First Two Years
The Showdown With Japan August–December 1941 Strategic Planning for Coalition Warfare, 1941–1942
THE UNITED STATES REPLIES Investigation of the Pearl Harbor attack
Painter 2012, p. 26: "The United States cut off oil exports to Japan in the summer of 1941, forcing Japanese leaders to choose between going to war to seize the oil fields of the Netherlands East Indies or giving in to U.S. pressure."
Wood 2007, p. 9, listing various military and diplomatic developments, observes that "the threat to Japan was not purely economic."
Lightbody 2004, p. 125.
Weinberg 2005, p. 310.
Dower 1986, p. 5, calls attention to the fact that "the Allied struggle against Japan exposed the racist underpinnings of the European and American colonial structure. Japan did not invade independent countries in southern Asia. It invaded colonial outposts which the Westerners had dominated for generations, taking absolutely for granted their racial and cultural superiority over their Asian subjects." Dower goes on to note that, before the horrors of Japanese occupation made themselves felt, many Asians responded favourably to the victories of the Imperial Japanese forces.
Wood 2007, pp. 11–2.
Wohlstetter 1962, pp. 341–3.
Dunn 1998, p. 157.
According to May 1955, p. 155, Churchill stated: "Russian declaration of war on Japan would be greatly to our advantage, provided, but only provided, that Russians are confident that will not impair their Western Front".
Mingst & Karns 2007, p. 22.
The First Full Dress Debate over Strategic Deployment December 1941 – January 1942 Strategic Planning for Coalition Warfare, 1941–1942
The Elimination of the Alternatives July–August 1942 Strategic Planning for Coalition Warfare, 1941–1942
Casablanca—Beginning of an Era: January 1943 Strategic Planning for Coalition Warfare, 1943–1944
The TRIDENT Conference—New Patterns: May 1943 Strategic Planning for Coalition Warfare, 1943–1944
Beevor 2012, pp. 247–267, 345.
Lewis 1953, p. 529 (Table 11).
Slim 1956, pp. 71–74.
Grove 1995, p. 362.
Ch'i 1992, p. 158.
Perez 1998, p. 145.
Maddox 1992, pp. 111–2.
Salecker 2001, p. 186.
Ropp 2000, p. 368.
Weinberg 2005, p. 339.
Gilbert, Adrian (2003). The Encyclopedia of Warfare: From Earliest Times to the Present Day. Globe Pequot. p. 259. ISBN 1-59228-027-7.
Swain 2001, p. 197.
Hane 2001, p. 340.
Marston 2005, p. 111.
Brayley 2002, p. 9.
Glantz 2001, p. 31.
Read 2004, p. 764.
Davies 2008, p. 100.
Beevor 1998, pp. 239–65.
Black 2003, p. 119.
Beevor 1998, pp. 383–91.
Erickson 2001, p. 142.
Milner 1990, p. 52.
Beevor 2012, pp. 224–8.
Molinari 2007, p. 91.
Mitcham 2007, p. 31.
Beevor 2012, pp. 380–1.
Rich 1992, p. 178.
Gordon 2004, p. 129.
Neillands 2005, p. ??.
Keegan 1997, p. 277.
Smith 2002.
Thomas & Andrew 1998, p. 8.
Ross 1997, p. 38.
Bonner & Bonner 2001, p. 24.
Collier 2003, p. 11.
" The Civilians United States Strategic Bombing Survey Summary Report (European War)
Thompson & Randall 2008, p. 164.
Kennedy 2001, p. 610.
Rottman 2002, p. 228.
Glantz 1986; Glantz 1989, pp. 149–59.
Kershaw 2001, p. 592.
O'Reilly 2001, p. 32.
Bellamy 2007, p. 595.
O'Reilly 2001, p. 35.
Healy 1992, p. 90.
Glantz 2001, pp. 50–55.
Kolko 1990, p. 45: "On September 3, as Allied forces landed in Italy, Badoglio agreed to a secret armistice in the hope the Allies would land a major force north of Rome and save his government and the king. When he learned such a rescue would not occur he desperately attempted to call off his bargain with Eisenhower, who cut short the matter on September 8 by announcing news of its existence. The next day the hero of Abyssinia, his king, and a small retinue deserted Rome for the southeast tip of Italy, leaving most of Italy to the Nazis."
Mazower 2008, p. 362.
Hart, Hart & Hughes 2000, p. 151.
Blinkhorn 2006, p. 52.
Read & Fisher 2002, p. 129.
Padfield 1998, pp. 335–6.
Kolko 1990, pp. 211, 235, 267–8.
Iriye 1981, p. 154.
Polley 2000, p. 148.
Beevor 2012, pp. 268–74.
Ch'i 1992, p. 161.
Hsu & Chang 1971, pp. 412–416, Map 38
Weinberg 2005, pp. 660–1.
Glantz 2002, pp. 327–66.
Glantz 2002, pp. 367–414.
Chubarov 2001, p. 122.
Holland 2008, pp. 169–84; Beevor 2012, pp. 568–73.
The weeks after the fall of Rome saw a dramatic upswing in German atrocities in Italy (Mazower 2008, pp. 500–2). The period featured massacres with victims in the hundreds at Civitella (de Grazia & Paggi 1991; Belco 2010), Fosse Ardeatine (Portelli 2003), and Sant'Anna di Stazzema (Gordon 2012, pp. 10–1), and is capped with the Marzabotto massacre.
Lightbody 2004, p. 224.
Zeiler 2004, p. 60.
Beevor 2012, pp. 555–60.
Ch'i 1992, p. 163.
Coble 2003, p. 85.
Rees 2008, pp. 406–7: "Stalin always believed that Britain and America were delaying the second front so that the Soviet Union would bear the brunt of the war".
Weinberg 2005, p. 695.
Badsey 1990, p. 91.
Dear & Foot 2001, p. 562.
Forrest, Evans & Gibbons 2012, p. 191
Zaloga 1996, p. 7: "It was the most calamitous defeat of all the German armed forces in World War II".
Berend 1996, p. 8.
"Armistice Negotiations and Soviet Occupation". US Library of Congress. Retrieved 14 November 2009. "The coup speeded the Red Army's advance, and the Soviet Union later awarded Michael the Order of Victory for his personal courage in overthrowing Antonescu and putting an end to Romania's war against the Allies. Western historians uniformly point out that the Communists played only a supporting role in the coup; postwar Romanian historians, however, ascribe to the Communists the decisive role in Antonescu's overthrow"
Evans 2008, p. 653.
Wiest & Barbier 2002, pp. 65–6.
Wiktor, Christian L (1998). Multilateral Treaty Calendar – 1648–1995. Kluwer Law International. p. 426. ISBN 90-411-0584-0.
Newton 2004.
Marston 2005, p. 120.
Jowett & Andrew 2002, p. 8.
Howard 2004, p. 140.
Drea 2003, p. 54.
Cook & Bewes 1997, p. 305.
Parker 2004, pp. xiii–xiv, 6–8, 68–70, 329–330
Glantz 2001, p. 85.
Beevor 2012, pp. 709–22.
Buchanan 2006, p. 21.
Shepardson 1998.
O'Reilly 2001, p. 244.
Kershaw 2001, p. 823.
Evans 2008, p. 737.
Glantz 1998, p. 24.
Chant, Christopher (1986). The Encyclopedia of Codenames of World War II. Routledge & Kegan Paul. p. 118. ISBN 0-7102-0718-2.
John Dower (2007). "Lessons from Iwo Jima". Perspectives 45 (6): 54–56.
Drea 2003, p. 57.
Jowett & Andrew 2002, p. 6.
Poirier, Michel Thomas (20 October 1999). "Results of the German and American Submarine Campaigns of World War II". U.S. Navy. Retrieved 13 April 2008.
Williams 2006, p. 90.
Miscamble 2007, p. 201.
Miscamble 2007, pp. 203–4.
Charles F. Brower (October 16, 2012). Defeating Japan: The Joint Chiefs of Staff and Strategy in the Pacific War, 1943–1945. Palgrave Macmillan. pp. 133–144.
Glantz 2005.
Pape 1993.
Beevor 2012, p. 776.
Frei 2002, pp. 41–66.
Roberts 2006, p. 43.
Roberts 2006, p. 55.
Shirer 1990, p. 794.
Kennedy-Pipe 1995.
Wettig 2008, pp. 20–1.
Senn 2007, p. ?.
Yoder 1997, p. 39.
"History of the UN". United Nations. Retrieved 25 January 2010.
Waltz 2002.
The UDHR is viewable here [1].
Kantowicz 2000, p. 6.
Wettig 2008, pp. 96–100.
Trachtenberg 1999, p. 33.
Applebaum 2012.
Naimark 2010.
Swain 1992.
Borstelmann 2005, p. 318.
Leffler & Westad 2010.
Weinberg 2005, p. 911.
Stueck 2010.
Lynch 2010, pp. 12–3.
Roberts 1997, p. 589.
Darwin 2007, pp. 441–3, 464–8.
Dear & Foot 2001, p. 1006; Harrison 1998, pp. 34–5.
Balabkins 1964, p. 207.
Petrov 1967, p. 263.
Balabkins 1964, pp. 208, 209.
DeLong & Eichengreen 1993, pp. 190, 191
Balabkins 1964, p. 212.
Wolf 1993, pp. 29, 30, 32
Bull & Newell 2005, pp. 20, 21
Ritchie 1992, p. 23.
Minford 1993, p. 117.
Schain 2001.
Emadi-Coffin 2002, p. 64.
Smith 1993, p. 32.
Neary 1992, p. 49.
Genzberger, Christine (1994). China Business: The Portable Encyclopedia for Doing Business with China. Petaluma, California: World Trade Press. p. 4. ISBN 0-9631864-3-4.
O'Brien, Prof. Joseph V. "World War II: Combatants and Casualties (1937–1945)". Obee's History Page. John Jay College of Criminal Justice. Archived from the original on 25 December 2010. Retrieved 28 December 2013.
White, Matthew. "Source List and Detailed Death Tolls for the Twentieth Century Hemoclysm". Historical Atlas of the Twentieth Century. Matthew White's Homepage. Retrieved 20 April 2007.
"World War II Fatalities". secondworldwar.co.uk. Retrieved 20 April 2007.
Hosking 2006, p. 242
Ellman & Maksudov 1994.
Smith 1994, p. 204.
Herf 2003.
Florida Center for Instructional Technology (2005). "Victims". A Teacher's Guide to the Holocaust. University of South Florida. Retrieved 2 February 2008.
Niewyk & Nicosia 2000, pp. 45–52.
"Non-Jewish Holocaust Victims : The 5,000,000 others". BBC. April 2006. Retrieved 4 August 2013.
Dear & Foot 2001, p. 290.
Evans 2008, pp. 158–60, 234–6.
Chang 1997, p. 102.
Rummell, R. J. "Statistics". Freedom, Democide, War. The University of Hawaii System. Retrieved 25 January 2010.
Bix 2000, p. ?.
Gold, Hal (1996). Unit 731 testimony. Tuttle. pp. 75–7. ISBN 0-8048-3565-9.
Tucker & Roberts 2004, p. 320.
Harris 2002, p. 74.
Lee 2002, p. 69.
"Japan tested chemical weapons on Aussie POW: new evidence". The Japan Times Online. 27 July 2004. Retrieved 25 January 2010.
Kużniar-Plota, Małgorzata (30 November 2004). "Decision to commence investigation into Katyn Massacre". Departmental Commission for the Prosecution of Crimes against the Polish Nation. Retrieved 4 August 2011.
Robert Gellately. Lenin, Stalin, and Hitler: The Age of Social Catastrophe. Knopf, 2007 ISBN 1-4000-4005-1 p. 391
Hempel, Andrew. (2000). Poland in World War II: An Illustrated Military History ISBN 978-0-7818-0758-6 p 14.
Harding, Luke (22 October 2003). "Germany's forgotten victims". The Guardian (London). Retrieved 21 January 2010.
Terror from the Sky: The Bombing of German Cities in World War II. Berghahn Books. 2010. p. 167. ISBN 1-84545-844-3.
Institute of National Remembrance, Polska 1939–1945 Straty osobowe i ofiary represji pod dwiema okupacjami. Materski and Szarota. page 9 "Total Polish population losses under German occupation are currently calculated at about 2 770 000".
Marek, Michael (27 October 2005). "Final Compensation Pending for Former Nazi Forced Laborers". dw-world.de. Deutsche Welle. Archived from the original on 19 January 2010. Retrieved 19 January 2010.
Applebaum 2003.
Herbert 1994, p. 222
Overy 2004, pp. 568–9.
Zemskov V.N. On repatriation of Soviet citizens. Istoriya SSSR., 1990, No.4, (in Russian). See also [2] (online version), and Bacon 1992; Ellman 2002.
"Japanese Atrocities in the Philippines". American Experience: the Bataan Rescue. PBS Online. Archived from the original on 19 January 2010. Retrieved 18 January 2010.
Tanaka 1996, pp. 2–3.
Bix 2000, p. 360.
Ju, Zhifen (June 2002). "Japan's atrocities of conscripting and abusing north China draughtees after the outbreak of the Pacific war". Joint Study of the Sino-Japanese War:Minutes of the June 2002 Conference. Harvard University Faculty of Arts and Sciences. Archived from the original on 21 May 2012. Retrieved 28 December 2013.
"Indonesia: World War II and the Struggle For Independence, 1942–50; The Japanese Occupation, 1942–45". Library of Congress. 1992. Retrieved 9 February 2007.
"Manzanar National Historic Site". U.S. National Park Service. Retrieved 21 February 2012.
Department of Labour of Canada (24 January 1947). Report on the Re-establishment of Japanese in Canada, 1944–1946. Department of Labour (Office of the Prime Minister). p. 23. ISBN 0-405-11266-1.
Kennedy 2001, pp. 749–50.
Davidson 1999, p. 121.
Stark, Tamás. ""Malenki Robot" – Hungarian Forced Labourers in the Soviet Union (1944–1955)" (PDF). Minorities Research. Retrieved 22 January 2010.
Liberman 1996, p. 42.
Milward 1992, p. 138.
Milward 1992, p. 148.
Barber & Harrison 2006, p. 232.
Hill 2005, p. 5.
Christofferson & Christofferson 2006, p. 156
Radtke 1997, p. 107.
Rahn 2001, p. 266.
Harrison 1998, p. 3.
Harrison 1998, p. 2.
Bernstein 1991, p. 267.
Griffith, Charles (1999). The Quest: Haywood Hansell and American Strategic Bombing in World War II. DIANE Publishing. p. 203. ISBN 1-58566-069-8.
Overy 1994, p. 26.
BBSU 1998, p. 84; Lindberg & Todd 2001, p. 126..
Unidas, Naciones (2005). World Economic And Social Survey 2004: International Migration. United Nations Pubns. p. 23. ISBN 92-1-109147-0.
Tucker & Roberts 2004, p. 76.
Levine 1992, p. 227.
Klavans, Di Benedetto & Prudom 1997; Ward 2010, pp. 247–51.
Tucker & Roberts 2004, p. 163.
Bishop, Chris; Chant, Chris (2004). Aircraft Carriers: The World's Greatest Naval Vessels and Their Aircraft. Wigston, Leics: Silverdale Books. p. 7. ISBN 1-84509-079-9.
Chenoweth, H. Avery; Nihart, Brooke (2005). Semper Fi: The Definitive Illustrated History of the U.S. Marines. New York: Main Street. p. 180. ISBN 1-4027-3099-3.
Sumner & Baker 2001, p. 25.
Hearn 2007, p. 14.
Gardiner & Brown 2004, p. 52.
Burcher & Rydill 1995, p. 15.
Burcher & Rydill 1995, p. 16.
Tucker & Roberts 2004, p. 125.
Dupuy, Trevor Nevitt (1982). The Evolution of Weapons and Warfare. Jane's Information Group. p. 231. ISBN 0-7106-0123-9.
Tucker & Roberts 2004, p. 108.
Tucker & Roberts 2004, p. 734.
Cowley & Parker 2001, p. 221.
"Infantry Weapons Of World War 2". Grey Falcon (Black Sun). Retrieved 14 November 2009. "These all-purpose guns were developed and used by the German army in the 2nd half of World War 2 as a result of studies which showed that the ordinary rifle's long range is much longer than needed, since the soldiers almost always fired at enemies closer than half of its effective range. The assault rifle is a balanced compromise between the rifle and the sub-machine gun, having sufficient range and accuracy to be used as a rifle, combined with the rapid-rate automatic firepower of the sub machine gun. Thanks to these combined advantages, assault rifles such as the American M-16 and the Russian AK-47 are the basic weapon of the modern soldier"
Sprague, Oliver; Griffiths, Hugh (2006). "The AK-47: the worlds favourite killing machine" (PDF). controlarms.org. p. 1. Retrieved 14 November 2009.
Ratcliff 2006, p. 11.
Schoenherr, Steven (2007). "Code Breaking in World War II". History Department at the University of San Diego. Archived from the original on 9 May 2008. Retrieved 15 November 2009.
Macintyre, Ben (10 December 2010). "Bravery of thousands of Poles was vital in securing victory". The Times (London). p. 27.
Rowe, Neil C.; Rothstein, Hy. "Deception for Defense of Information Systems: Analogies from Conventional Warfare". Departments of Computer Science and Defense Analysis U.S. Naval Postgraduate School. Air University. Retrieved 15 November 2009.

    "Konrad Zuse (1910–1995)". Istituto Dalle Molle di Studi sull'Intelligenza Artificiale. Retrieved 14 November 2009. "Konrad Zuse builds Z1, world's first programme-controlled computer. Despite mechanical engineering problems it had all the basic ingredients of modern machines, using the binary system and today's standard separation of storage and control. Zuse's 1936 patent application (Z23139/GMD Nr. 005/021) also suggests a von Neumann architecture (re-invented in 1945) with programme and data modifiable in storage"

References

        Adamthwaite, Anthony P. (1992). The Making of the Second World War. New York: Routledge. ISBN 0-415-90716-0.
        Aksar, Yusuf (2004). Implementing Intnl Humanitaria: From the AD Hoc Tribunals to a Permanent International Criminal Court. London and New York, NY: Routledge. ISBN 978-0-7146-5584-0.
        Anderson, Irvine H., Jr. (1975). "The 1941 De Facto Embargo on Oil to Japan: A Bureaucratic Reflex". The Pacific Historical Review 44 (2). JSTOR 3638003.
        Applebaum, Anne (2003). Gulag: A History of the Soviet Camps. London: Allen Lane. ISBN 978-0-7139-9322-6.
        ——— (2012). Iron Curtain: The Crushing of Eastern Europe 1944–56. London: Allen Lane. ISBN 978-0-7139-9868-9.
        Bacon, Edwin (1992). "Glasnost' and the Gulag: New Information on Soviet Forced Labour around World War II". Soviet Studies 44 (6): 1069–1086. doi:10.1080/09668139208412066. JSTOR 152330.
        Badsey, Stephen (1990). Normandy 1944: Allied Landings and Breakout. Oxford: Osprey Publishing. ISBN 978-0-85045-921-0.
        Balabkins, Nicholas (1964). Germany Under Direct Controls: Economic Aspects of Industrial Disarmament 1945–1948. New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press. ISBN 978-0-8135-0449-0.
        Barber, John; Harrison, Mark (2006). "Patriotic War, 1941–1945". In Ronald Grigor Suny, ed.,' The Cambridge History of Russia, Volume III: The Twentieth Century (pp. 217–242). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-81144-6.
        Barker, A. J. (1971). The Rape of Ethiopia 1936. New York, NY: Ballantine Books. ISBN 978-0-345-02462-6.
        Barrett, David P.; Shyu, Lawrence N. (2001). China in the Anti-Japanese War, 1937–1945: Politics, Culture and Society. New York, NY: Peter Lang. ISBN 978-0-8204-4556-4.
        Beevor, Antony (1998). Stalingrad. New York, NY: Viking. ISBN 978-0-670-87095-0.
        ——— (2006). The Battle for Spain: The Spanish Civil War 1936–1939. London: Weidenfeld & Nicolson. ISBN 978-0-297-84832-5.
        ——— (2012). The Second World War. London: Weidenfeld & Nicolson. ISBN 978-0-297-84497-6.
        Belco, Victoria (2010). War, Massacre, and Recovery in Central Italy: 1943–1948. Toronto: University of Toronto Press. ISBN 978-0-8020-9314-1.
        Bellamy, Chris T. (2007). Absolute War: Soviet Russia in the Second World War. New York, NY: Alfred A. Knopf. ISBN 978-0-375-41086-4.
        Ben-Horin, Eliahu (1943). The Middle East: Crossroads of History. New York, NY: W. W. Norton & Company.
        Berend, Ivan T. (1996). Central and Eastern Europe, 1944–1993: Detour from the Periphery to the Periphery. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-55066-6.
        Bernstein, Gail Lee (1991). Recreating Japanese Women, 1600–1945. Berkeley & Los Angeles, CA: University of California Press. ISBN 978-0-520-07017-2.
        Bilhartz, Terry D.; Elliott, Alan C. (2007). Currents in American History: A Brief History of the United States. Armonk, NY: M. E. Sharpe. ISBN 978-0-7656-1821-4.
        Bilinsky, Yaroslav (1999). Endgame in NATO's Enlargement: The Baltic States and Ukraine. Westport, CT: Greenwood Publishing Group. ISBN 978-0-275-96363-7.
        Bix, Herbert P. (2000). Hirohito and the Making of Modern Japan. New York, NY: HarperCollins. ISBN 978-0-06-019314-0.
        Black, Jeremy (2003). World War Two: A Military History. Abingdon and New York, NY: Routledge. ISBN 978-0-415-30534-1.
        Blinkhorn, Martin (2006) [1984]. Mussolini and Fascist Italy (3rd ed.). Abingdon and New York, NY: Routledge. ISBN 978-0-415-26206-4.
        Bonner, Kit; Bonner, Carolyn (2001). Warship Boneyards. Osceola, WI: MBI Publishing Company. ISBN 978-0-7603-0870-7.
        Borstelmann, Thomas (2005). "The United States, the Cold War, and the color line". In Melvyn P. Leffler and David S. Painter, eds., Origins of the Cold War: An International History (pp. 317–332) (2nd ed.). Abingdon & New York, NY: Routledge. ISBN 978-0-415-34109-7.
        Brayley, Martin J. (2002). The British Army 1939–45, Volume 3: The Far East. Oxford: Osprey Publishing. ISBN 978-1-84176-238-8.
        British Bombing Survey Unit (1998). The Strategic Air War Against Germany, 1939–1945. London and Portland, OR: Frank Cass Publishers. ISBN 978-0-7146-4722-7.
        Brody, J. Kenneth (1999). The Avoidable War: Pierre Laval and the Politics of Reality, 1935–1936. New Brunswick, NJ: Transaction Publishers. ISBN 978-0-7658-0622-2.
        Brown, David (2004). The Road to Oran: Anglo-French Naval Relations, September 1939 – July 1940. London & New York, NY: Frank Cass. ISBN 978-0-7146-5461-4.
        Buchanan, Tom (2006). Europe's Troubled Peace, 1945–2000. Oxford & Malden, MA: Blackwell Publishing. ISBN 978-0-631-22162-3.
        Budiansky, Stephen (2001). Battle of Wits: The Complete Story of Codebreaking in World War II. London: Penguin Books. ISBN 978-0-14-028105-7.
        ——— (2004). Air Power: The Men, Machines, and Ideas that Revolutionized War, from Kitty Hawk to Gulf War II. London: Viking. ISBN 978-0-670-03285-3.
        Bueno de Mesquita, Bruce; Smith, Alastair; Siverson, Randolph M.; Morrow, James D. (2003). The Logic of Political Survival. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. ISBN 978-0-262-02546-1.
        Bull, Martin J.; Newell, James L. (2005). Italian Politics: Adjustment Under Duress. Polity. ISBN 978-0-7456-1298-0.
        Bullock, Alan (1990). Hitler: A Study in Tyranny. London: Penguin Books. ISBN 978-0-14-013564-0.
        Burcher, Roy; Rydill, Louis (1995). Concepts in Submarine Design. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-55926-3.
        Busky, Donald F. (2002). Communism in History and Theory: Asia, Africa, and the Americas. Westport, CT: Praeger Publishers. ISBN 0-275-97733-1.
        Canfora, Luciano (2006) [2004]. Democracy in Europe: A History. Oxford & Malden MA: Blackwell Publishing. ISBN 978-1-4051-1131-7.
        Cantril, Hadley (1940). "America Faces the War: A Study in Public Opinion". Public Opinion Quarterly 4 (3): 387–407. doi:10.1086/265420. JSTOR 2745078.
        Chaney, Otto Preston (1996). Zhukov (Revised ed.). Norman, OK: University of Oklahoma Press. ISBN 978-0-8061-2807-8.
        Chang, Iris (1997). The Rape of Nanking: The Forgotten Holocaust of World War II. New York, NY: Basic Books. ISBN 978-0-465-06835-7.
        Christofferson, Thomas R.; Christofferson, Michael S. (2006). France During World War II: From Defeat to Liberation. New York, NY: Fordham University Press. ISBN 978-0-8232-2562-0.
        Chubarov, Alexander (2001). Russia's Bitter Path to Modernity: A History of the Soviet and Post-Soviet Eras. London & New York, NY: Continuum. ISBN 978-0-8264-1350-5.
        Ch'i, Hsi-Sheng (1992). "The Military Dimension, 1942–1945". In James C. Hsiung and Steven I. Levine, eds., China's Bitter Victory: War with Japan, 1937–45 (pp. 157–184). Armonk, NY: M. E. Sharpe. ISBN 978-1-56324-246-5.
        Cienciala, Anna M. (2010). "Another look at the Poles and Poland during World War II". The Polish Review 55 (1): 123–143. JSTOR 25779864.
        Clogg, Richard (2002). A Concise History of Greece (2nd ed.). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-80872-9.
        Coble, Parks M. (2003). Chinese Capitalists in Japan's New Order: The Occupied Lower Yangzi, 1937–1945. Berkeley & Los Angeles, CA: University of California Press. ISBN 978-0-520-23268-6.
        Collier, Paul (2003). The Second World War (4): The Mediterranean 1940–1945. Oxford: Osprey Publishing. ISBN 978-1-84176-539-6.
        Collier, Martin; Pedley, Philip (2000). Germany 1919–45. Oxford: Heinemann. ISBN 978-0-435-32721-7.
        Commager, Henry Steele (2004). The Story of the Second World War. Brassey's. ISBN 978-1-57488-741-9.
        Coogan, Anthony (1993). "The Volunteer Armies of Northeast China". History Today 43. Retrieved 6 May 2012.
        Cook, Chris; Bewes, Diccon (1997). What Happened Where: A Guide to Places and Events in Twentieth-Century History. London: UCL Press. ISBN 978-1-85728-532-1.
        Coox, Alvin D. (1990). Nomonhan: Japan Against Russia, 1939. Palo Alto, CA: Stanford University Press. ISBN 978-0-8047-1160-9.
        Cowley, Robert; Parker, Geoffrey, eds. (2001). Readers Companion Military History. Boston, MA: Houghton Mifflin Company. ISBN 978-0-618-12742-9.
        Darwin, John (2007). After Tamerlane: The Rise & Fall of Global Empires 1400–2000. London: Penguin Books. ISBN 978-0-14-101022-9.
        Davidson, Eugene (1999). The Death and Life of Germany: An Account of the American Occupation. University of Missouri Press. ISBN 0-8262-1249-2.
        Davies, Norman (2008). No Simple Victory: World War II in Europe, 1939–1945. London: Penguin Books. ISBN 978-0-14-311409-3.
        Dawood, Mary; Mitra, Anu (2012). "Hidden agendas and hidden illness". Diversity and Equality in Health and Care 9 (4): 297–298.
        Dear, I. C. B.; Foot, M. R. D., eds. (2001) [1995]. The Oxford Companion to World War II. Oxford: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-860446-4.
        DeLong, J. Bradford; Eichengreen, Barry (1993). "The Marshall Plan: History's Most Successful Structural Adjustment Program". In Rudiger Dornbusch, Wilhelm Nölling and Richard Layard, eds., Postwar Economic Reconstruction and Lessons for the East Today (pp. 189–230). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. ISBN 978-0-262-04136-2.
        Douglas, R. M. (2012). Orderly and Humane: The Expulsion of the Germans After the Second World War. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press. ISBN 978-0-300-16660-6.
        Dower, John W. (1986). War Without Mercy: Race and Power in the Pacific War. New York, NY: Pantheon Books. ISBN 978-0-394-50030-0.
        Drea, Edward J. (2003). In the Service of the Emperor: Essays on the Imperial Japanese Army. Lincoln, NE: University of Nebraska Press. ISBN 978-0-8032-6638-4.
        de Grazia, Victoria; Paggi, Leonardo (1991). "Story of an Ordinary Massacre: Civitella della Chiana, 29 June, 1944". Cardozo Studies in Law and Literature, Vol. 3, No. 2 (Autumn, 1991): 153–169. JSTOR 743479.
        Dunn, Dennis J. (1998). Caught Between Roosevelt & Stalin: America's Ambassadors to Moscow. Lexington, KY: University Press of Kentucky. ISBN 978-0-8131-2023-2.
        Eastman, Lloyd E. (1986). "Nationalist China during the Sino-Japanese War 1937–1945". In John K. Fairbank and Denis Twitchett, eds., The Cambridge History of China, Volume 13: Republican China 1912–1949, Part 2. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-24338-4.
        Ellman, Michael (2002). "Soviet Repression Statistics: Some Comments". Europe-Asia Studies 54 (7): 1151–1172. doi:10.1080/0966813022000017177. JSTOR 826310. Copy
        ———; Maksudov, S. (1994). "Soviet Deaths in the Great Patriotic War: A Note". Europe-Asia Studies 46 (4): 671–680. doi:10.1080/09668139408412190. JSTOR 152934.
        Emadi-Coffin, Barbara (2002). Rethinking International Organization: Deregulation and Global Governance. London and New York, NY: Routledge. ISBN 978-0-415-19540-9.
        Erickson, John (2001). "Moskalenko". In Harold Shukman, ed., Stalin's Generals (pp. 137–154). London: Phoenix Press. ISBN 978-1-84212-513-7.
        ——— (2003). The Road to Stalingrad. London: Cassell Military. ISBN 978-0-304-36541-8.
        Evans, David C.; Peattie, Mark R. (2012) [1997]. Kaigun: Strategy, Tactics, and Technology in the Imperial Japanese Navy. Annapolis, MD: Naval Institute Press. ISBN 978-1-59114-244-7.
        Evans, Richard J. (2008). The Third Reich at War. London: Allen Lane. ISBN 978-0-7139-9742-2.
        Fairbank, John King; Goldman, Merle (2006) [1994]. China: A New History (2nd ed.). Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. ISBN 978-0-674-01828-0.
        Farrell, Brian P. (1993). "Yes, Prime Minister: Barbarossa, Whipcord, and the Basis of British Grand Strategy, Autumn 1941". Journal of Military History 57 (4): 599–625. doi:10.2307/2944096. JSTOR 2944096.
        Ferguson, Niall (2006). The War of the World: Twentieth-Century Conflict and the Descent of the West. Penguin. ISBN 978-0-14-311239-6.
        Ferraro, Kathleen J. (2008). "Reviews: Taken by Force: Rape and American GIs in Europe during WWII by J. Robert Lilly". Contemporary Sociology 37 (6): 585–586. doi:10.1177/009430610803700640. JSTOR 20444365.
        Fitzgerald, Stephanie (2011). Children of the Holocaust. Mankato, MN: Compass Point Books. ISBN 9780756543907.
        Forrest, Glen; Evans, Anthony; Gibbons, David (2012). The Illustrated Timeline of Military History. New York: The Rosen Publishing Group. ISBN 9781448847945.
        Förster, Stig; Gessler, Myriam (2005). "The Ultimate Horror: Reflections on Total War and Genocide". In Roger Chickering, Stig Förster and Bernd Greiner, eds., A World at Total War: Global Conflict and the Politics of Destruction, 1937–1945 (pp. 53–68). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-83432-2.
        Frei, Norbert (2002). Adenauer's Germany and the Nazi Past: The Politics of Amnesty and Integration. New York, NY: Columbia University Press. ISBN 978-0-231-11882-8.
        Gardiner, Robert; Brown, David K., eds. (2004). The Eclipse of the Big Gun: The Warship 1906–1945. London: Conway Maritime Press. ISBN 978-0-85177-953-9.
        Garthoff, Raymond L. (1969). "The Soviet Manchurian Campaign, August 1945". Military Affairs 33 (2): 312–336. doi:10.2307/1983926. JSTOR 1983926.
        Garver, John W. (1988). Chinese-Soviet Relations, 1937–1945: The Diplomacy of Chinese Nationalism. New York, NY: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-505432-3.
        Glantz, David M. (1986). "Soviet Defensive Tactics at Kursk, July 1943". CSI Report No. 11. Combined Arms Research Library. OCLC 278029256. Retrieved 15 July 2013.
        ——— (1989). Soviet Military Deception in the Second World War. Abingdon and New York, NY: Frank Cass. ISBN 978-0-7146-3347-3.
        ——— (1998). When Titans Clashed: How the Red Army Stopped Hitler. Lawrence, KS: University Press of Kansas. ISBN 978-0-7006-0899-7.
        ——— (2001). "The Soviet-German War 1941–45 Myths and Realities: A Survey Essay". Archived from the original on 17 June 2011.
        ——— (2002). The Battle for Leningrad: 1941–1944. Lawrence, KS: University Press of Kansas. ISBN 978-0-7006-1208-6.
        ——— (2005). "August Storm: The Soviet Strategic Offensive in Manchuria". Leavenworth Papers. Combined Arms Research Library. OCLC 78918907. Retrieved 15 July 2013.
        Goldstein, Margaret J. (2004). World War II: Europe. Minneapolis: Lerner Publications. ISBN 978-0-8225-0139-8.
        Gordon, Andrew (2004). "The greatest military armada ever launched". In Jane Penrose, ed., The D-Day Companion (pp. 127–144). Oxford: Osprey Publishing. ISBN 978-1-84176-779-6.
        Gordon, Robert S. C. (2012). The Holocaust in Italian Culture, 1944–2010. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press. ISBN 978-0-8047-6346-2.
        Graham, Helen (2005). The Spanish Civil War: A Very Short Introduction. Oxford & New York, NY: Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-280377-8.
        Grove, Eric J. (1995). "A Service Vindicated, 1939–1946". In J. R. Hill, ed., The Oxford Illustrated History of the Royal Navy (pp. 348–380). Oxford: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-211675-8.
        Hane, Mikiso (2001). Modern Japan: A Historical Survey (3rd ed.). Boulder, CO: Westview Press. ISBN 978-0-8133-3756-2.
        Hanhimäki, Jussi M. (1997). Containing Coexistence: America, Russia, and the "Finnish Solution". Kent, OH: Kent State University Press. ISBN 978-0-87338-558-9.
        Harris, Sheldon H. (2002). Factories of Death: Japanese Biological Warfare, 1932–1945, and the American Cover-up (2nd ed.). London and New York, NY: Routledge. ISBN 978-0-415-93214-1.
        Harrison, Mark (1998). "The economics of World War II: an overview". In Mark Harrison, ed., The Economics of World War II: Six Great Powers in International Comparison (pp. 1–42). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-62046-8.
        Hart, Stephen; Hart, Russell; Hughes, Matthew (2000). The German Soldier in World War II. Osceola, WI: MBI Publishing Company. ISBN 978-1-86227-073-2.
        Hatfield, Kenneth K. (2003). Heartland Heroes: Remembering World War II. Columbia, MO: University of Missouri Press. ISBN 978-0-8262-1460-7.
        Hauner, Milan (1978). "Did Hitler Want a World Dominion?". Journal of Contemporary History 13 (1): 15–32. doi:10.1177/002200947801300102. JSTOR 260090.
        Healy, Mark (1992). Kursk 1943: The Tide Turns in the East. Oxford: Osprey Publishing. ISBN 978-1-85532-211-0.
        Hearn, Chester G. (2007). Carriers in Combat: The Air War at Sea. Mechanicsburg, PA: Stackpole Books. ISBN 978-0-8117-3398-4.
        Hedgepeth, Sonja; Saidel, Rochelle (2010). Sexual Violence against Jewish Women During the Holocaust. Lebanon, NH: University Press of New England. ISBN 9781584659044.
        Hempel, Andrew (2005). Poland in World War II: An Illustrated Military History. New York, NY: Hippocrene Books. ISBN 978-0-7818-1004-3.
        Herbert, Ulrich (1994). "Labor as spoils of conquest, 1933–1945". In David F. Crew, ed., Nazism and German Society, 1933–1945 (pp. 219–273). London and New York, NY: Routledge. ISBN 978-0-415-08239-6.
        Herf, Jeffrey (2003). "The Nazi Extermination Camps and the Ally to the East. Could the Red Army and Air Force Have Stopped or Slowed the Final Solution?". Kritika: Explorations in Russian and Eurasian History 4 (4): 913–930. doi:10.1353/kri.2003.0059.
        Hill, Alexander (2005). The War Behind The Eastern Front: The Soviet Partisan Movement In North-West Russia 1941–1944. London & New York, NY: Frank Cass. ISBN 978-0-7146-5711-0.
        Holland, James (2008). Italy's Sorrow: A Year of War 1944–45. London: HarperPress. ISBN 978-0-00-717645-8.
        Hosking, Geoffrey A. (2006). Rulers and Victims: The Russians in the Soviet Union. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. ISBN 978-0-674-02178-5.
        Howard, Joshua H. (2004). Workers at War: Labor in China's Arsenals, 1937–1953. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press. ISBN 978-0-8047-4896-4.
        Hsu, Long-hsuen; Chang, Ming-kai (1971). History of The Sino-Japanese War (1937–1945) 2nd Ed. Chung Wu Publishers. ASIN B00005W210.
        Ingram, Norman (2006). "Pacifism". In Lawrence D. Kritzman and Brian J. Reilly, eds., The Columbia History Of Twentieth-Century French Thought (pp. 76–78). New York, NY: Columbia University Press. ISBN 978-0-231-10791-4.
        Iriye, Akira (1981). Power and Culture: The Japanese-American War, 1941–1945. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. ISBN 978-0-674-69580-1.
        Jackson, Ashley (2006). The British Empire and the Second World War. London & New York, NY: Hambledon Continuum. ISBN 978-1-85285-417-1.
        Joes, Anthony James (2004). Resisting Rebellion: The History And Politics of Counterinsurgency. Lexington, KE: University Press of Kentucky. ISBN 978-0-8131-2339-4.
        Jowett, Philip S. (2001). The Italian Army 1940–45, Volume 2: Africa 1940–43. Oxford: Osprey Publishing. ISBN 978-1-85532-865-5.
        ———; Andrew, Stephen (2002). The Japanese Army, 1931–45. Oxford: Osprey Publishing. ISBN 978-1-84176-353-8.
        Judt, Tony; Snyder, Timothy (2012). Thinking the Twentieth Century: Intellectuals and Politics in the Twentieth Century. London: William Heinemann. ISBN 978-0-434-01742-3.
        Jukes, Geoffrey (2001). "Kuznetzov". In Harold Shukman, ed., Stalin's Generals (pp. 109–116). London: Phoenix Press. ISBN 978-1-84212-513-7.
        Kantowicz, Edward R. (1999). The Rage of Nations. Grand Rapids, MI: William B. Eerdmans Publishing Company. ISBN 978-0-8028-4455-2.
        ——— (2000). Coming Apart, Coming Together. Grand Rapids, MI: William B. Eerdmans Publishing Company. ISBN 978-0-8028-4456-9.
        Keeble, Curtis (1990). "The historical perspective". In Alex Pravda and Peter J. Duncan, eds., Soviet-British Relations Since the 1970s. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-37494-1.
        Keegan, John (1997). The Second World War. London: Pimlico. ISBN 978-0-7126-7348-8.
        Kelly, Nigel; Rees, Rosemary; Shuter, Jane (1998). Twentieth Century World. London: Heinemann. ISBN 978-0-435-30983-1.
        Kennedy, David M. (2001). Freedom from Fear: The American People in Depression and War, 1929–1945. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-514403-1.
        Kennedy-Pipe, Caroline (1995). Stalin's Cold War: Soviet Strategies in Europe, 1943–56. Manchester: Manchester University Press. ISBN 978-0-7190-4201-0.
        Kershaw, Ian (2001). Hitler, 1936–1945: Nemesis. New York, NY: W. W. Norton & Company. ISBN 978-0-393-04994-7.
        ——— (2007). Fateful Choices: Ten Decisions That Changed the World, 1940–1941. London: Allen Lane. ISBN 978-0-7139-9712-5.
        Kitson, Alison (2001). Germany 1858–1990: Hope, Terror, and Revival. Oxford: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-913417-5.
        Klavans, Richard A.; Di Benedetto, C. Anthony; Prudom, Melanie J. (1997). "Understanding Competitive Interactions: The U.S. Commercial Aircraft Market". Journal of Managerial Issues 9 (1): 13–361. JSTOR 40604127.
        Kleinfeld, Gerald R. (1983). "Hitler's Strike for Tikhvin". Military Affairs 47 (3): 122–128. doi:10.2307/1988082. JSTOR 1988082.
        Koch, H. W. (1983). "Hitler's 'Programme' and the Genesis of Operation 'Barbarossa'". The Historical Journal 26 (4): 891–920. JSTOR 2639289.
        Kolko, Gabriel (1990) [1968]. The Politics of War: The World and United States Foreign Policy, 1943–1945. New York, NY: Random House. ISBN 978-0-679-72757-6.
        Laurier, Jim (2001). Tobruk 1941: Rommel's Opening Move. Oxford: Osprey Publishing. ISBN 978-1-84176-092-6.
        Lee, En-han (2002). "The Nanking Massacre Reassessed: A Study of the Sino-Japanese Controversy over the Factual Number of Massacred Victims". In Robert Sabella, Fei Fei Li and David Liu, eds., Nanking 1937: Memory and Healing (pp. 47–74). Armonk, NY: M. E. Sharpe. ISBN 978-0-7656-0816-1.
        Leffler, Melvyn P.; Westad, Odd Arne, eds. (2010). The Cambridge History of the Cold War (3 volumes). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-83938-9.
        Levine, Alan J. (1992). The Strategic Bombing of Germany, 1940–1945. Westport, CT: Praeger. ISBN 978-0-275-94319-6.
        Lewis, Morton (1953). "Japanese Plans and American Defenses". In Kent Roberts Greenfield, ed., The Fall of the Philippines. Washington, DC: US Government Printing Office. Library of Congress Catalogue Card Number: 53-63678.
        Liberman, Peter (1996). Does Conquest Pay?: The Exploitation of Occupied Industrial Societies. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Pressisbn=978-0-691-02986-3.
        Lightbody, Bradley (2004). The Second World War: Ambitions to Nemesis. London & New York, NY: Routledge. ISBN 978-0-415-22404-8.
        Lilly, J. Robert (2007). Taken by Force: Rape and American GIs in Europe during World War II. New York, NY: Palgrave Macmillan. ISBN 978-0-230-50647-3.
        Lindberg, Michael; Todd, Daniel (2001). Brown-, Green- and Blue-Water Fleets: the Influence of Geography on Naval Warfare, 1861 to the Present. Westport, CT: Praeger. ISBN 978-0-275-96486-3.
        Lowe, C. J.; Marzari, F. (2002). Italian Foreign Policy 1870–1940. London: Routledge. ISBN 978-0-415-26681-9.
        Lynch, Michael (2010). The Chinese Civil War 1945–49. Oxford: Osprey Publishing. ISBN 978-1-84176-671-3.
        Macksey, Kenneth (1997) [1979]. Rommel: Battles and Campaigns. Cambridge, MA: Da Capo Press. ISBN 978-0-306-80786-2.
        Maddox, Robert James (1992). The United States and World War II. Boulder, CO: Westview Press. ISBN 978-0-8133-0437-3.
        Maingot, Anthony P. (1994). The United States and the Caribbean: Challenges of an Asymmetrical Relationship. Boulder, CO: Westview Press. ISBN 978-0-8133-2241-4.
        Mandelbaum, Michael (1988). The Fate of Nations: The Search for National Security in the Nineteenth and Twentieth Centuries. Cambridge University Press. p. 96. ISBN 0-521-35790-X.
        Marston, Daniel (2005). The Pacific War Companion: From Pearl Harbor to Hiroshima. Oxford: Osprey Publishing. ISBN 978-1-84176-882-3.
        Masaya, Shiraishi (1990). Japanese Relations with Vietnam, 1951–1987. Ithaca, NY: SEAP Publications. ISBN 978-0-87727-122-2.
        May, Ernest R. (1955). "The United States, the Soviet Union, and the Far Eastern War, 1941–1945". Pacific Historical Review 24 (2): 153–174. doi:10.2307/3634575. JSTOR 3634575.
        Mazower, Mark (2008). Hitler's Empire: Nazi Rule in Occupied Europe. London: Allen Lane. ISBN 978-1-59420-188-2.
        Milner, Marc (1990). "The Battle of the Atlantic". In John Gooch, ed., Decisive Campaigns of the Second World War (pp. 45–66). Abingdon: Frank Cass. ISBN 978-0-7146-3369-5.
        Milward, A. S. (1964). "The End of the Blitzkrieg". The Economic History Review 16 (3): 499–518. doi:10.2307/2592851. JSTOR 2592851.
        ——— (1992) [1977]. War, Economy, and Society, 1939–1945. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press. ISBN 978-0-520-03942-1.
        Minford, Patrick (1993). "Reconstruction and the UK Postwar Welfare State: False Start and New Beginning". In Rudiger Dornbusch, Wilhelm Nölling and Richard Layard, eds., Postwar Economic Reconstruction and Lessons for the East Today (pp. 115–138). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. ISBN 978-0-262-04136-2.
        Mingst, Karen A.; Karns, Margaret P. (2007). United Nations in the Twenty-First Century (3rd ed.). Boulder, CO: Westview Press. ISBN 978-0-8133-4346-4.
        Miscamble, Wilson D. (2007). From Roosevelt to Truman: Potsdam, Hiroshima, and the Cold War. New York, NY: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-86244-8.
        Mitcham, Samuel W. (2007) [1982]. Rommel's Desert War: The Life and Death of the Afrika Korps. Mechanicsburg, PA: Stackpole Books. ISBN 978-0-8117-3413-4.
        Molinari, Andrea (2007). Desert Raiders: Axis and Allied Special Forces 1940–43. Oxford: Osprey Publishing. ISBN 978-1-84603-006-2.
        Morison, Samuel Eliot (2002). History of United States Naval Operations in World War II, Volume 14: Victory in the Pacific, 1945. Champaign, IL: University of Illinois Press. ISBN 978-0-252-07065-5.
        Murray, Williamson (1983). Strategy for Defeat: The Luftwaffe, 1933–1945. Maxwell Air Force Base, AL: Air University Press. ISBN 978-1-4294-9235-5.
        ———; Millett, Allan Reed (2001). A War to Be Won: Fighting the Second World War. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. ISBN 978-0-674-00680-5.
        Myers, Ramon; Peattie, Mark (1987). The Japanese Colonial Empire, 1895–1945. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. ISBN 978-0-691-10222-1.
        Naimark, Norman (2010). "The Sovietization of Eastern Europe, 1944–1953". In Melvyn P. Leffler and Odd Arne Westad, eds., The Cambridge History of the Cold War, Volume I: Origins (pp. 175–197). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-83719-4.
        Neary, Ian (1992). "Japan". In Martin Harrop, ed., Power and Policy in Liberal Democracies (pp. 49–70). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-34579-8.
        Neillands, Robin (2005). The Dieppe Raid: The Story of the Disastrous 1942 Expedition. Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press. ISBN 978-0-253-34781-7.
        Newton, Steven H. (2004). Retreat from Leningrad: Army Group North, 1944/1945. Atglen, PA: Schiffer Books. ISBN 978-0-88740-806-9.
        Niewyk, Donald L.; Nicosia, Francis (2000). The Columbia Guide to the Holocaust. New York, NY: Columbia University Press. ISBN 978-0-231-11200-0.
        O'Hara, Vincent (2004). The German Fleet at War, 1939–1945. Naval Institute Press. ISBN 9781591146513.
        Overy, Richard (1994). War and Economy in the Third Reich. New York, NY: Clarendon Press. ISBN 978-0-19-820290-5.
        ——— (2004). The Dictators: Hitler's Germany, Stalin's Russia. New York, NY: W. W. Norton & Company. ISBN 978-0-393-02030-4.
        ———; Wheatcroft, Andrew (1999). The Road to War (2nd ed.). London: Penguin Books. ISBN 978-0-14-028530-7.
        O'Reilly, Charles T. (2001). Forgotten Battles: Italy's War of Liberation, 1943–1945. Lanham, MD: Lexington Books. ISBN 978-0-7391-0195-7.
        Painter, David S. (2012). "Oil and the American Century". The Journal of American History 99 (1): 24–39. doi:10.1093/jahist/jas073.
        Padfield, Peter (1998). War Beneath the Sea: Submarine Conflict During World War II. New York, NY: John Wiley. ISBN 978-0-471-24945-0.
        Pape, Robert A. (1993). "Why Japan Surrendered". International Security 18 (2): 154–201. doi:10.2307/2539100. JSTOR 2539100.
        Parker, Danny S. (2004). Battle of the Bulge: Hitler's Ardennes Offensive, 1944–1945 (New ed.). Cambridge, MA: Da Capo Press. ISBN 978-0-306-81391-7.
        Payne, Stanley G. (2008). Franco and Hitler: Spain, Germany, and World War II. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press. ISBN 978-0-300-12282-4.
        Perez, Louis G. (1998). The History of Japan. Westport, CT: Greenwood Publishing Group. ISBN 978-0-313-30296-1.
        Petrov, Vladimir (1967). Money and Conquest: Allied Occupation Currencies in World War II. Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press. ISBN 978-0-8018-0530-1.
        Polley, Martin (2000). An A–Z of Modern Europe Since 1789. London and New York, NY: Routledge. ISBN 978-0-415-18597-4.
        Portelli, Alessandro (2003). The Order Has Been Carried Out: History, Memory, and Meaning of a Nazi Massacre in Rome. Basingstoke & New York, NYPalgrave Macmillan978-1403980083.
        Preston, P. W. (1998). Pacific Asia in the Global System: An Introduction. Oxford & Malden, MA: Blackwell Publishers. ISBN 978-0-631-20238-7.
        Prins, Gwyn (2002). The Heart of War: On Power, Conflict and Obligation in the Twenty-First Century. London & New York, NY: Routledge. ISBN 978-0-415-36960-2.
        Radtke, K. W. (1997). "'Strategic' concepts underlying the so-called Hirota foreign policy, 1933–7". In Aiko Ikeo, ed., Economic Development in Twentieth Century East Asia: The International Context (pp. 100–120). London and New York, NY: Routledge. ISBN 978-0-415-14900-6.
        Rahn, Werner (2001). "The War in the Pacific". In Horst Boog, Werner Rahn, Reinhard Stumpf and Bernd Wegner, eds., Germany and the Second World War, Volume VI: The Global War (pp. 191–298). Oxford: Clarendon Press. ISBN 978-0-19-822888-2.
        Ratcliff, R. A. (2006). Delusions of Intelligence: Enigma, Ultra, and the End of Secure Ciphers. New York, NY: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-85522-8.
        Read, Anthony (2004). The Devil's Disciples: Hitler's Inner Circle. New York, NY: W. W. Norton & Company. ISBN 978-0-393-04800-1.
        Read, Anthony; Fisher, David (2002) [1992]. The Fall Of Berlin. London: Pimlico. ISBN 978-0-7126-0695-0.
        Record, Jeffery (2005). Appeasement Reconsidered: Investigating the Mythology of the 1930s (PDF). DIANE Publishing. p. 50. ISBN 1-58487-216-0. Retrieved 15 November 2009.
        Rees, Laurence (2008). World War II Behind Closed Doors: Stalin, the Nazis and the West. London: BBC Books. ISBN 978-0-563-49335-8.
        Regan, Geoffrey (2004). The Brassey's Book of Military Blunders. Brassey's. ISBN 978-1-57488-252-0.
        Reinhardt, Klaus (1992). Moscow – The Turning Point: The Failure of Hitler's Strategy in the Winter of 1941–42. Oxford: Berg. ISBN 978-0-85496-695-0.
        Reynolds, David (2006). From World War to Cold War: Churchill, Roosevelt, and the International History of the 1940s. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-928411-5.
        Rich, Norman (1992) [1973]. Hitler's War Aims, Volume I: Ideology, the Nazi State, and the Course of Expansion. New York, NY: W. W. Norton & Company. ISBN 978-0-393-00802-9.
        Ritchie, Ella (1992). "France". In Martin Harrop, ed., Power and Policy in Liberal Democracies (pp. 23–48). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-34579-8.
        Roberts, Cynthia A. (1995). "Planning for War: The Red Army and the Catastrophe of 1941". Europe-Asia Studies 47 (8): 1293–1326. doi:10.1080/09668139508412322. JSTOR 153299.
        Roberts, Geoffrey (2006). Stalin's Wars: From World War to Cold War, 1939–1953. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press. ISBN 978-0-300-11204-7.
        Roberts, J. M. (1997). The Penguin History of Europe. London: Penguin Books. ISBN 978-0-14-026561-3.
        Ropp, Theodore (2000). War in the Modern World (Revised ed.). Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press. ISBN 978-0-8018-6445-2.
        Roskill, S. W. (1954). The War at Sea 1939–1945, Volume 1: The Defensive. History of the Second World War. United Kingdom Military Series. London: HMSO.
        Ross, Steven T. (1997). American War Plans, 1941–1945: The Test of Battle. Abingdon and New York, NY: Routledge. ISBN 978-0-7146-4634-3.
        Rottman, Gordon L. (2002). World War II Pacific Island Guide: A Geo-Military Study. Westport, CT: Greenwood Press. ISBN 978-0-313-31395-0.
        Rotundo, Louis (1986). "The Creation of Soviet Reserves and the 1941 Campaign". Military Affairs 50 (1): 21–8. doi:10.2307/1988530. JSTOR 1988530.
        Salecker, Gene Eric (2001). Fortress Against the Sun: The B-17 Flying Fortress in the Pacific. Conshohocken, PA: Combined Publishing. ISBN 978-1-58097-049-5.
        Schain, Martin A., ed. (2001). The Marshall Plan Fifty Years Later. London: Palgrave Macmillan. ISBN 978-0-333-92983-4.
        Schmitz, David F. (2000). Henry L. Stimson: The First Wise Man. Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield. ISBN 978-0-8420-2632-1.
        Schofield, B. B. (1981). "The Defeat of the U-Boats during World War II". Journal of Contemporary History 16 (1): 119–129. doi:10.1177/002200948101600107. JSTOR 260619.
        Sella, Amnon (1978). ""Barbarossa": Surprise Attack and Communication". Journal of Contemporary History 13 (3): 555–583. doi:10.1177/002200947801300308. JSTOR 260209.
        ——— (1983). "Khalkhin-Gol: The Forgotten War". Journal of Contemporary History 18 (4): 651–687. JSTOR 260307.
        Senn, Alfred Erich (2007). Lithuania 1940: Revolution from Above. Amsterdam & New York, NY: Rodopi. ISBN 978-90-420-2225-6.
        Shaw, Anthony (2000). World War II: Day by Day. Osceola, WI: MBI Publishing Company. ISBN 978-0-7603-0939-1.
        Shepardson, Donald E. (1998). "The Fall of Berlin and the Rise of a Myth". Journal of Military History 62 (1): 135–154. doi:10.2307/120398. JSTOR 120398.
        Shirer, William L. (1990) [1960]. The Rise and Fall of the Third Reich: A History of Nazi Germany. New York, NY: Simon & Schuster. ISBN 0-671-72868-7.
        Shore, Zachary (2003). What Hitler Knew: The Battle for Information in Nazi Foreign Policy. New York, NY: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-518261-3.
        Slim, William (1956). Defeat into Victory. London: Cassell. ISBN 0-304-29114-5.
        Smith, Alan (1993). Russia and the World Economy: Problems of Integration. London: Routledge. ISBN 978-0-415-08924-1.
        Smith, J.W. (1994). The World's Wasted Wealth 2: Save Our Wealth, Save Our Environment. Institute for Economic Democracy. ISBN 0-9624423-2-1.
        Smith, Peter C. (2002) [1970]. Pedestal: The Convoy That Saved Malta (5th ed.). Manchester: Goodall. ISBN 978-0-907579-19-9.
        Smith, David J.; Pabriks, Artis; Purs, Aldis; Lane, Thomas (2002). The Baltic States: Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania. London: Routledge. ISBN 978-0-415-28580-3.
        Smith, Winston; Steadman, Ralph (2004). All Riot on the Western Front, Volume 3. Last Gasp. ISBN 978-0-86719-616-0.
        Snyder, Timothy (2010). Bloodlands: Europe Between Hitler and Stalin. London: The Bodley Head. ISBN 978-0-224-08141-2.
        Sommerville, Donald (2008). The Complete Illustrated History of World War Two: An Authoritative Account of the Deadliest Conflict in Human History with Analysis of Decisive Encounters and Landmark Engagements. Leicester: Lorenz Books. ISBN 978-0-7548-1898-4.
        Spring, D. W. (1986). "The Soviet Decision for War against Finland, 30 November 1939". Soviet Studies 38 (2): 207–226. doi:10.1080/09668138608411636. JSTOR 151203.
        Steinberg, Jonathan (1995). "The Third Reich Reflected: German Civil Administration in the Occupied Soviet Union, 1941–4". The English Historical Review 110 (437): 620–651. doi:10.1093/ehr/cx.437.620. JSTOR 578338.
        Steury, Donald P. (1987). "Naval Intelligence, the Atlantic Campaign and the Sinking of the Bismarck: A Study in the Integration of Intelligence into the Conduct of Naval Warfare". Journal of Contemporary History 22 (2): 209–233. doi:10.1177/002200948702200202. JSTOR 260931.
        Stueck, William (2010). "The Korean War". In Melvyn P. Leffler and Odd Arne Westad, eds., The Cambridge History of the Cold War, Volume I: Origins (pp. 266–287). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-83719-4.
        Sumner, Ian; Baker, Alix (2001). The Royal Navy 1939–45. Oxford: Osprey Publishing. ISBN 978-1-84176-195-4.
        Swain, Bruce (2001). A Chronology of Australian Armed Forces at War 1939–45. Crows Nest: Allen & Unwin. ISBN 978-1-86508-352-0.
        Swain, Geoffrey (1992). "The Cominform: Tito's International?". The Historical Journal 35 (3): 641–663. doi:10.1017/S0018246X00026017.
        Tanaka, Yuki (1996). Hidden Horrors: Japanese War Crimes in World War II. Boulder, CO: Westview Press. ISBN 978-0-8133-2717-4.
        Taylor, A. J. P. (1961). The Origins of the Second World War. London: Hamish Hamilton.
        ——— (1979). How Wars Begin. London: Hamish Hamilton. ISBN 978-0-241-10017-2.
        Taylor, Jay (2009). The Generalissimo: Chiang Kai-shek and the Struggle for Modern China. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. ISBN 978-0-674-03338-2.
        Thomas, Nigel; Andrew, Stephen (1998). German Army 1939–1945 (2): North Africa & Balkans. Oxford: Osprey Publishing. ISBN 978-1-85532-640-8.
        Thompson, John Herd; Randall, Stephen J. (2008). Canada and the United States: Ambivalent Allies (4th ed.). Athens, GA: University of Georgia Press. ISBN 978-0-8203-3113-3.
        Trachtenberg, Marc (1999). A Constructed Peace: The Making of the European Settlement, 1945–1963. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. ISBN 978-0-691-00273-6.
        Tucker, Spencer C.; Roberts, Priscilla Mary (2004). Encyclopedia of World War II: A Political, Social, and Military History. ABC-CLIO. ISBN 1-57607-999-6.
        Umbreit, Hans (1991). "The Battle for Hegemony in Western Europe". In P. S. Falla, ed., Germany and the Second World War, Volume 2: Germany's Initial Conquests in Europe (pp. 227–326). Oxford: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-822885-1.
        United States Army (1986) [1953]. The German Campaigns in the Balkans (Spring 1941). Washington, DC: Department of the Army.
        Waltz, Susan (2002). "Reclaiming and Rebuilding the History of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights". Third World Quarterly 23 (3): 437–448. doi:10.1080/01436590220138378. JSTOR 3993535.
        Ward, Thomas A. (2010). Aerospace Propulsion Systems. Singapore: John Wiley & Sons. ISBN 978-0-470-82497-9.
        Watson, William E. (2003). Tricolor and Crescent: France and the Islamic World. Westport, CT: Praeger. ISBN 0-275-97470-7.
        Weinberg, Gerhard L. (2005). A World at Arms: A Global History of World War II (2nd ed.). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-85316-3.; comprehensive overview with emphasis on diplomacy
        Wettig, Gerhard (2008). Stalin and the Cold War in Europe: The Emergence and Development of East-West Conflict, 1939–1953. Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield. ISBN 978-0-7425-5542-6.
        Wiest, Andrew; Barbier, M. K. (2002). Strategy and Tactics: Infantry Warfare. St Paul, MN: MBI Publishing Company. ISBN 978-0-7603-1401-2.
        Williams, Andrew (2006). Liberalism and War: The Victors and the Vanquished. Abingdon & New York, NY: Routledge. ISBN 978-0-415-35980-1.
        Wilt, Alan F. (1981). "Hitler's Late Summer Pause in 1941". Military Affairs 45 (4): 187–91. doi:10.2307/1987464. JSTOR 1987464.
        Wohlstetter, Roberta (1962). Pearl Harbor: Warning and Decision. Palo Alto, CA: Stanford University Press. ISBN 978-0-8047-0597-4.
        Wolf, Holger C. (1993). "The Lucky Miracle: Germany 1945–1951". In Rudiger Dornbusch, Wilhelm Nölling and Richard Layard, eds., Postwar Economic Reconstruction and Lessons for the East Today (pp. 29–56). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. ISBN 978-0-262-04136-2.
        Wood, James B. (2007). Japanese Military Strategy in the Pacific War: Was Defeat Inevitable?. Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield. ISBN 978-0-7425-5339-2.
        Yoder, Amos (1997). The Evolution of the United Nations System (3rd ed.). London & Washington, DC: Taylor & Francis. ISBN 1-56032-546-1.
        Zalampas, Michael (1989). Adolf Hitler and the Third Reich in American magazines, 1923–1939. Bowling Green University Popular Press. ISBN 0-87972-462-5.
        Zaloga, Steven J. (1996). Bagration 1944: The Destruction of Army Group Centre. Oxford: Osprey Publishing. ISBN 978-1-85532-478-7.
        ——— (2002). Poland 1939: The Birth of Blitzkrieg. Oxford: Osprey Publishing. ISBN 978-1-84176-408-5.
        Zeiler, Thomas W. and Daniel M. DuBois, eds. A Companion to World War II (2 vol 2013), 1030pp; comprehensive overview by scholars
        Zeiler, Thomas W. (2004). Unconditional Defeat: Japan, America, and the End of World War II. Wilmington, DE: Scholarly Resources. ISBN 978-0-8420-2991-9.
        Zetterling, Niklas; Tamelander, Michael (2009). Bismarck: The Final Days of Germany's Greatest Battleship. Drexel Hill, PA: Casemate. ISBN 978-1-935149-04-0.

External links

    West Point Maps of the European War
    West Point Maps of the Asian-Pacific War
    Atlas of the World Battle Fronts (July 1943 to August 1945)

Books
View or order collections of articles 	
Office-book.svg 	World War II
Portals
Access related topics 	
Heinkel He 111 during the Battle of Britain.jpg 	World War II portal
Find out more on Wikipedia's
Sister projects 	
Commons-logo.svg 	Media
from Commons
Wikinews-logo.svg 	News stories
from Wikinews
Wiktionary-logo-en.svg 	Definitions
from Wiktionary
Wikibooks-logo.svg 	Textbooks
from Wikibooks
Wikiquote-logo.svg 	Quotations
from Wikiquote
Wikisource-logo.svg 	Source texts
from Wikisource
Wikiversity-logo.svg 	Learning resources
from Wikiversity
[show]

    v
    t
    e

World War II
[show]

    v
    t
    e

History of World War II by region and country
This is a good article. Click here for more information.
Categories:

    World War II
    Conflicts in 1939
    Conflicts in 1940
    Conflicts in 1941
    Conflicts in 1942
    Conflicts in 1943
    Conflicts in 1944
    Conflicts in 1945
    Contemporary French history
    Contemporary German history
    Contemporary Italian history
    Global conflicts
    History of Montenegro
    History of the Soviet Union and Soviet Russia
    History of the United States (1918–45)
    Modern Europe
    Modern history
    Nuclear warfare
    War
    Wars involving Albania
    Wars involving Australia
    Wars involving Austria
    Wars involving Belgium
    Wars involving Bolivia
    Wars involving Brazil
    Wars involving British India
    Wars involving Bulgaria
    Wars involving Burma
    Wars involving Cambodia
    Wars involving Canada
    Wars involving Chile
    Wars involving Colombia
    Wars involving Costa Rica
    Wars involving Croatia
    Wars involving Cuba
    Wars involving Czechoslovakia
    Wars involving Denmark
    Wars involving Ecuador
    Wars involving Egypt
    Wars involving El Salvador
    Wars involving Estonia
    Wars involving Ethiopia
    Wars involving Finland
    Wars involving France
    Wars involving Germany
    Wars involving Greece
    Wars involving Guatemala
    Wars involving Haiti
    Wars involving Honduras
    Wars involving Hungary
    Wars involving Iceland
    Wars involving Indonesia
    Wars involving Italy
    Wars involving Iran
    Wars involving Iraq
    Wars involving Japan
    Wars involving Laos
    Wars involving Latvia
    Wars involving Lebanon
    Wars involving Liberia
    Wars involving Lithuania
    Wars involving Luxembourg
    Wars involving Mexico
    Wars involving Mongolia
    Wars involving Montenegro
    Wars involving Nepal
    Wars involving Norway
    Wars involving Nicaragua
    Wars involving Panama
    Wars involving Paraguay
    Wars involving Peru
    Wars involving Poland
    Wars involving Rhodesia
    Wars involving Romania
    Wars involving Saudi Arabia
    Wars involving Serbia
    Wars involving Slovakia
    Wars involving Slovenia
    Wars involving South Africa
    Wars involving Sri Lanka
    Wars involving Syria
    Wars involving Thailand
    Wars involving the Dominican Republic
    Wars involving the Netherlands
    Wars involving the Philippines
    Wars involving the Republic of China
    Wars involving the Soviet Union
    Wars involving the United Kingdom
    Wars involving the United States
    Wars involving Uruguay
    Wars involving Venezuela
    Wars involving Vietnam
    Wars involving Yugoslavia
	
	World War I
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
"World War One" and "Great War" redirect here. For other uses, see World War One (disambiguation) and Great War (disambiguation).
"WW1" and "WWI" redirect here. For the album by White Whale, see WWI (album).
Page semi-protected
World War I
WWImontage.jpg
Clockwise from the top: The aftermath of shelling during the Battle of the Somme, Mark V tanks cross the Hindenburg Line, HMS Irresistible sinks after hitting a mine in the Dardanelles, a British Vickers machine gun crew wears gas masks during the Battle of the Somme, Albatros D.III fighters of Jagdstaffel 11
Date 	28 July 1914 – 11 November 1918
(4 years, 3 months and 2 weeks)
Peace treaties[show]
Location 	Europe, Africa, the Middle East, the Pacific Islands, China and off the coast of South and North America
Result 	Allied victory

    End of the German, Russian, Ottoman, and Austro-Hungarian empires
    Formation of new countries in Europe and the Middle East
    Transfer of German colonies and regions of the former Ottoman Empire to other powers
    Establishment of the League of Nations. (more...)

Belligerents

Allied Powers
 France
 United Kingdom

     Australia
     Canada
     India
     Newfoundland
    New Zealand
     South Africa

 Russia
 Italy (1915–18)
 United States (1917–18)
 Japan
 Romania (1916–18)
 Serbia
 Belgium
 Greece (1917–18)
 Portugal (1916–18)
 Montenegro
Thailand Siam (1917–18)
...and others 	

Central Powers
 Germany
 Austria-Hungary
 Ottoman Empire
 Bulgaria (1915–18)
Co-belligerents
Jabal Shammar
...and others
Commanders and leaders

Allied leaders
French Third Republic Georges Clemenceau
French Third Republic Raymond Poincaré
French Third Republic Ferdinand Foch
British Empire George V
British Empire H. H. Asquith
British Empire David Lloyd George
Russian Empire Nicholas II
Russian Empire Nicholas Nikolaevich
Russian Empire Aleksei Brusilov
Kingdom of Italy Victor Emmanuel III
Kingdom of Italy Vittorio Orlando
Kingdom of Italy Paolo Boselli
Kingdom of Italy Antonio Salandra
United States Woodrow Wilson
United States John J. Pershing
Kingdom of Romania Ferdinand I
Kingdom of Romania Constantin Prezan
Empire of Japan Taishō
Kingdom of Serbia Peter I
Kingdom of Serbia Radomir Putnik
...and others 	

Central Powers leaders German Empire Wilhelm II
German Empire Paul von Hindenburg
German Empire Erich Ludendorff
German Empire Erich von Falkenhayn
German Empire Helmuth von Moltke
Austria-Hungary Franz Joseph I
Austria-Hungary Karl I
Austria-Hungary Conrad von Hötzendorf
Austria-Hungary Arz von Straußenburg
Ottoman Empire Mehmed V
Ottoman Empire Mehmed VI
Ottoman Empire Talaat Pasha
Ottoman Empire Enver Pasha
Ottoman Empire Djemal Pasha
Kingdom of Bulgaria Ferdinand I
Kingdom of Bulgaria Nikola Zhekov
...and others
Strength

Russian Empire 12,000,000
British Empire 8,841,541[1][2]
French Third Republic 8,660,000[3]
Kingdom of Italy 5,615,140
United States 4,743,826
Kingdom of Romania 1,234,000
Empire of Japan 800,000
Kingdom of Serbia 707,343
Belgium 380,000
Kingdom of Greece 250,000
Total: 42,959,850[4] 	

German Empire 13,250,000
Austria-Hungary 7,800,000
Ottoman Empire 2,998,321
Kingdom of Bulgaria 1,200,000
Total: 25,248,321[4]
Casualties and losses
Military dead:
5,525,000
Military wounded:
12,831,500
Military missing:
4,121,000
Total:
22,477,500 KIA, WIA or MIA
...further details. 	Military dead:
4,386,000
Military wounded:
8,388,000
Military missing:
3,629,000
Total:
16,403,000 KIA, WIA or MIA
...further details.
[show]

    v
    t
    e

Theatres of World War I
Events leading to World War I Triple Alliance 	1882
Franco-Russian Alliance 	1894
Anglo-German naval arms race 	1898–1912
Entente cordiale 	1904
Tangier Crisis 	1905–06
Anglo-Russian Entente 	1907
Bosnian crisis 	1908–09
Agadir Crisis 	1911
Italo-Turkish War 	1911–12
Balkan Wars 	1912–13
Assassination of Franz Ferdinand 	1914
July Crisis 	1914

    v
    t
    e

World War I (WWI or WW1), also known as the First World War or the Great War, was a global war centered in Europe that began on 28 July 1914 and lasted until 11 November 1918. More than 9 million combatants and 7 million civilians died as a result of the war, a casualty rate exacerbated by the belligerents' technological and industrial sophistication, and tactical stalemate. It was one of the deadliest conflicts in history, paving the way for major political changes, including revolutions in many of the nations involved.[5]

The war drew in all the world's economic great powers,[6] which were assembled in two opposing alliances: the Allies (based on the Triple Entente of the United Kingdom, France and the Russian Empire) and the Central Powers of Germany and Austria-Hungary. Although Italy had also been a member of the Triple Alliance alongside Germany and Austria-Hungary, it did not join the Central Powers, as Austria-Hungary had taken the offensive against the terms of the alliance.[7] These alliances were reorganised and expanded as more nations entered the war: Italy, Japan and the United States joined the Allies, and the Ottoman Empire and Bulgaria the Central Powers. Ultimately, more than 70 million military personnel, including 60 million Europeans, were mobilised in one of the largest wars in history.[8][9]

The immediate trigger for war was the 28 June 1914 assassination of Archduke Franz Ferdinand of Austria, heir to the throne of Austria-Hungary, by Yugoslav nationalist Gavrilo Princip in Sarajevo. This set off a diplomatic crisis when Austria-Hungary delivered an ultimatum to the Kingdom of Serbia,[10][11] and entangled international alliances formed over the previous decades were invoked. Within weeks, the major powers were at war and the conflict soon spread around the world.

On 28 July, the Austro-Hungarians declared war on Serbia and subsequently invaded.[12][13] As Russia mobilised in support of Serbia, Germany invaded neutral Belgium and Luxembourg before moving towards France, leading Britain to declare war on Germany. After the German march on Paris was halted, what became known as the Western Front settled into a battle of attrition, with a trench line that would change little until 1917. Meanwhile, on the Eastern Front, the Russian army was successful against the Austro-Hungarians, but was stopped in its invasion of East Prussia by the Germans. In November 1914, the Ottoman Empire joined the Central Powers, opening fronts in the Caucasus, Mesopotamia and the Sinai. Italy joined the Allies in 1915 and Bulgaria joined the Central Powers in the same year, while Romania joined the Allies in 1916, and the United States joined the Allies in 1917.

The Russian government collapsed in March 1917, and a subsequent revolution in November brought the Russians to terms with the Central Powers via the Treaty of Brest Litovsk, which constituted a massive German victory until nullified by the 1918 victory of the Western allies. After a stunning Spring 1918 German offensive along the Western Front, the Allies rallied and drove back the Germans in a series of successful offensives. On 4 November 1918, the Austro-Hungarian empire agreed to an armistice, and Germany, which had its own trouble with revolutionaries, agreed to an armistice on 11 November 1918, ending the war in victory for the Allies.

By the end of the war, four major imperial powers—the German, Russian, Austro-Hungarian and Ottoman empires—ceased to exist. The successor states of the former two lost substantial territory, while the latter two were dismantled. The maps of Europe and Southwest Asia were redrawn, with several independent nations restored or created. During the Paris Peace conference, The Big Four imposed their terms in a series of treaties. The League of Nations was formed with the aim of preventing any repetition of such an appalling conflict. This aim, however, failed with weakened states, economic depression, renewed European nationalism, and the German feeling of humiliation contributing to the rise of nazism. These conditions eventually contributed to World War II.

Contents

    1 Etymology
    2 Background
        2.1 Political and military alliances
        2.2 Arms race
        2.3 Conflicts in the Balkans
    3 Prelude
        3.1 Sarajevo assassination
        3.2 Escalation of violence in Bosnia and Herzegovina
        3.3 July Crisis
    4 Progress of the war
        4.1 Opening hostilities
            4.1.1 Confusion among the Central Powers
            4.1.2 Serbian campaign
            4.1.3 German forces in Belgium and France
            4.1.4 Asia and the Pacific
            4.1.5 African campaigns
            4.1.6 Indian support for the Allies
        4.2 Western Front
            4.2.1 Trench warfare begins
            4.2.2 Continuation of trench warfare
        4.3 Naval war
        4.4 Southern theatres
            4.4.1 War in the Balkans
            4.4.2 Ottoman Empire
            4.4.3 Italian participation
            4.4.4 Romanian participation
        4.5 Eastern Front
            4.5.1 Initial actions
            4.5.2 Russian Revolution
            4.5.3 Czechoslovak Legion
        4.6 Central Powers proposal for starting peace negotiations
        4.7 1917–1918
            4.7.1 Developments in 1917
            4.7.2 Ottoman Empire conflict, 1917–1918
            4.7.3 Entry of the United States
            4.7.4 German Spring Offensive of 1918
            4.7.5 New states under war zone
        4.8 Allied victory: summer 1918 onwards
            4.8.1 Hundred Days Offensive
            4.8.2 Armistices and capitulations
    5 Aftermath
        5.1 Formal end of the war
        5.2 Peace treaties and national boundaries
        5.3 National identities
        5.4 Health effects
    6 Technology
        6.1 Ground warfare
        6.2 Naval
        6.3 Aviation
    7 War crimes
        7.1 Baralong incidents
        7.2 HMHS Llandovery Castle
        7.3 Chemical weapons in warfare
        7.4 Genocide and ethnic cleansing
            7.4.1 Russian Empire
        7.5 Rape of Belgium
    8 Soldiers' experiences
        8.1 Prisoners of war
        8.2 Military attachés and war correspondents
    9 Support and opposition to the war
        9.1 Support
        9.2 Opposition
            9.2.1 Conscription
    10 Legacy and memory
        10.1 Historiography
        10.2 Memorials
        10.3 Cultural memory
        10.4 Social trauma
        10.5 Discontent in Germany
        10.6 Economic effects
    11 Media
    12 See also
    13 Footnotes
    14 Notes
    15 References
        15.1 Historiography and memory
    16 External links
        16.1 Animated maps
        16.2 Library guides

Etymology

From the time of its start until the approach of World War II, it was called simply the World War or the Great War and thereafter the First World War or World War I.[14][15]

In Canada, Maclean's Magazine in October 1914 said, "Some wars name themselves. This is the Great War."[16] During the Interwar period (1918–1939), the war was most often called the World War and the Great War in English-speaking countries.

The term "First World War" was first used in September 1914 by the German philosopher Ernst Haeckel, who claimed that "there is no doubt that the course and character of the feared 'European War' ... will become the first world war in the full sense of the word."[17] After the onset of the Second World War in 1939, the terms World War I or the First World War became standard, with British and Canadian historians favouring the First World War, and Americans World War I.
Background
Main article: Causes of World War I
Military alliances leading to World War I; Triple Entente in green; Central Powers in brown
Political and military alliances

In the 19th century, the major European powers had gone to great lengths to maintain a balance of power throughout Europe, resulting in the existence of a complex network of political and military alliances throughout the continent by 1900.[7] These had started in 1815, with the Holy Alliance between Prussia, Russia, and Austria. Then, in October 1873, German Chancellor Otto von Bismarck negotiated the League of the Three Emperors (German: Dreikaiserbund) between the monarchs of Austria-Hungary, Russia and Germany. This agreement failed because Austria-Hungary and Russia could not agree over Balkan policy, leaving Germany and Austria-Hungary in an alliance formed in 1879, called the Dual Alliance. This was seen as a method of countering Russian influence in the Balkans as the Ottoman Empire continued to weaken.[7] In 1882, this alliance was expanded to include Italy in what became the Triple Alliance.[18]

Bismarck had especially worked to hold Russia at Germany's side to avoid a two-front war with France and Russia. When Wilhelm II ascended to the throne as German Emperor (Kaiser), Bismarck was compelled to retire and his system of alliances was gradually de-emphasised. For example, the Kaiser refused to renew the Reinsurance Treaty with Russia in 1890. Two years later, the Franco-Russian Alliance was signed to counteract the force of the Triple Alliance. In 1904, Britain signed a series of agreements with France, the Entente Cordiale, and in 1907, Britain and Russia signed the Anglo-Russian Convention. While these agreements did not formally ally Britain with France or Russia, they made British entry into any future conflict involving France or Russia a possibility, and the system of interlocking bilateral agreements became known as the Triple Entente.[7]
Arms race

German industrial and economic power had grown greatly after unification and the foundation of the Empire in 1871 following the Franco-Prussian War. From the mid-1890s on, the government of Wilhelm II used this base to devote significant economic resources for building up the Kaiserliche Marine (Imperial German Navy), established by Admiral Alfred von Tirpitz, in rivalry with the British Royal Navy for world naval supremacy.[19] As a result, each nation strove to out-build the other in capital ships. With the launch of HMS Dreadnought in 1906, the British Empire expanded on its significant advantage over its German rival.[19] The arms race between Britain and Germany eventually extended to the rest of Europe, with all the major powers devoting their industrial base to producing the equipment and weapons necessary for a pan-European conflict.[20] Between 1908 and 1913, the military spending of the European powers increased by 50%.[21]
Sarajevo citizens reading a poster with the proclamation of the Austrian annexation in 1908.
Conflicts in the Balkans

Austria-Hungary precipitated the Bosnian crisis of 1908–1909 by officially annexing the former Ottoman territory of Bosnia and Herzegovina, which it had occupied since 1878. This angered the Kingdom of Serbia and its patron, the Pan-Slavic and Orthodox Russian Empire.[22] Russian political manoeuvring in the region destabilised peace accords, which were already fracturing in what was known as "the powder keg of Europe".[22] In 1912 and 1913, the First Balkan War was fought between the Balkan League and the fracturing Ottoman Empire. The resulting Treaty of London further shrank the Ottoman Empire, creating an independent Albanian State while enlarging the territorial holdings of Bulgaria, Serbia, Montenegro, and Greece. When Bulgaria attacked Serbia and Greece on 16 June 1913, it lost most of Macedonia to Serbia and Greece and Southern Dobruja to Romania in the 33-day Second Balkan War, further destabilising the region.[23]
Prelude
This picture is usually associated with the arrest of Gavrilo Princip, although some[24][25] believe it depicts Ferdinand Behr, a bystander.
Sarajevo assassination
Main article: Assassination of Archduke Franz Ferdinand

On 28 June 1914, Austrian Archduke Franz Ferdinand visited the Bosnian capital, Sarajevo. A group of six assassins (Cvjetko Popović, Gavrilo Princip, Muhamed Mehmedbašić, Nedeljko Čabrinović, Trifko Grabež, Vaso Čubrilović) from the nationalist group Mlada Bosna, supplied by the Black Hand, had gathered on the street where the Archduke's motorcade would pass. Čabrinović threw a grenade at the car, but missed. It injured some people nearby, and Franz Ferdinand's convoy carried on. The other assassins failed to act as the cars drove past them. About an hour later, when Franz Ferdinand was returning from a visit at the Sarajevo Hospital with those wounded in the assassination attempt, the convoy took a wrong turn into a street where, by coincidence, Princip stood. With a pistol, Princip shot and killed Franz Ferdinand and his wife Sophie. The reaction among the people in Austria was mild, almost indifferent. As historian Zbyněk Zeman later wrote, "the event almost failed to make any impression whatsoever. On Sunday and Monday [June 28 and 29], the crowds in Vienna listened to music and drank wine, as if nothing had happened."[26][27]
Crowds on the streets in the aftermath of the Anti-Serb riots in Sarajevo, 29 June 1914.
Escalation of violence in Bosnia and Herzegovina
Main articles: Anti-Serb riots in Sarajevo and Schutzkorps

However, in Sarajevo itself, Austrian authorities encouraged[28][29] violence against the Serb residents, which resulted in the Anti-Serb riots of Sarajevo, in which Croats and Bosnian Muslims killed two ethnic Serbs and damaged numerous Serb-owned buildings. The events have been described as having the characteristics of a pogrom. Writer Ivo Andrić referred to the violence as the "Sarajevo frenzy of hate."[30] Violent actions against ethnic Serbs were organized not only in Sarajevo, but also in many other large Austro-Hungarian cities in modern-day Croatia and Bosnia and Herzegovina.[31] Austro-Hungarian authorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina imprisoned and extradited approximately 5,500 prominent Serbs, 700 to 2,200 of whom died in prison. 460 Serbs were sentenced to death and a predominantly Muslim[32][33][34] special militia known as the Schutzkorps was established and carried out the persecution of Serbs.[35]
July Crisis
Main article: July Crisis

The assassination led to a month of diplomatic manoeuvering between Austria-Hungary, Germany, Russia, France, and Britain called the July Crisis. Believing correctly that Serbian officials (especially the officers of the Black Hand) were involved in the plot to murder the Archduke, and wanting to finally end Serbian interference in Bosnia,[36] Austria-Hungary delivered to Serbia on 23 July the July Ultimatum, a series of ten demands that were made intentionally unacceptable, in an effort to provoke a war with Serbia.[37] The next day, after the Council of Ministers was held under the chairmanship of the Tsar at Krasnoe Selo, Russia ordered general mobilization for Odessa, Kiev, Kazan and Moscow military districts and fleets of the Baltic and the Black Sea. They also asked for other regions to accelerate preparations for general mobilization. Serbia decreed general mobilization on the 25th and at night, declared that they accept all the terms of the ultimatum, except the one claiming that Austrian investigators visit the country. Following this, Austria broke off diplomatic relations with Serbia, and the next day ordered a partial mobilization against Serbia. Finally, on 28 July 1914, Austria-Hungary declared war on Serbia.

On 29 July, Russia, unwilling to allow Austria-Hungary to eliminate its influence in the Balkans, and in support of its longtime Serb protégé, unilaterally declared – outside of the conciliation procedure provided by the Franco-Russian military agreements – partial mobilization against Austria-Hungary. German Chancellor Bethmann-Hollweg was then allowed until the 31st for an appropriate response. On the 30th, Russia ordered general mobilization against Germany. In response, the following day, Germany declared a "state of danger of war." This also led to the general mobilization in Austria-Hungary on 4 August. Kaiser Wilhelm II asked his cousin, Tsar Nicolas II, to suspend the Russian general mobilization. When he refused, Germany issued an ultimatum demanding the arrest of its mobilization and commitment not to support Serbia. Another was sent to France, asking her not to support Russia if it were to come to the defense of Serbia. On 1 August, after the Russian response, Germany mobilized and declared war on Russia.

The German government issued demands that France remain neutral as they had to decide which deployment plan to implement, it being difficult if not impossible to change the deployment whilst it was already underway. The modified German Schlieffen Plan, Aufmarsch II West, would deploy 80% of the army in the west, and Aufmarsch I Ost and Aufmarsch II Ost would deploy 60% in the west and 40% in the east as this was the maximum that East Prussia's railway infrastructure could support. The French did not respond but sent a mixed message by ordering their troops to withdraw 10 km (6 mi) from the border to avoid any incidents while ordering the mobilisation of her reserves. Germany responded by mobilising its own reserves and implementing Aufmarsch II West. Germany attacked Luxembourg on 2 August and on 3 August declared war on France.[38] On 4 August, after Belgium refused to permit German troops to cross its borders into France, Germany declared war on Belgium as well.[38][39][40] Britain declared war on Germany at 7 pm UTC on 4 August 1914 (effective from 11 pm), following an "unsatisfactory reply" to the British ultimatum that Belgium must be kept neutral.[41]
Progress of the war
Opening hostilities
Confusion among the Central Powers

The strategy of the Central Powers suffered from miscommunication. Germany had promised to support Austria-Hungary's invasion of Serbia, but interpretations of what this meant differed. Previously tested deployment plans had been replaced early in 1914, but had never been tested in exercises. Austro-Hungarian leaders believed Germany would cover its northern flank against Russia.[42] Germany, however, envisioned Austria-Hungary directing most of its troops against Russia, while Germany dealt with France. This confusion forced the Austro-Hungarian Army to divide its forces between the Russian and Serbian fronts.
Serbian campaign
Serbian Army Blériot XI "Oluj", 1915.
Main article: Serbian Campaign (World War I)

Austria invaded and fought the Serbian army at the Battle of Cer and Battle of Kolubara beginning on 12 August. Over the next two weeks, Austrian attacks were thrown back with heavy losses, which marked the first major Allied victories of the war and dashed Austro-Hungarian hopes of a swift victory. As a result, Austria had to keep sizable forces on the Serbian front, weakening its efforts against Russia.[43] Serbia's defeat of the Austro-Hungarian invasion of 1914 counts among the major upset victories of the last century.[44]
German forces in Belgium and France
Main article: Western Front (World War I)
British hospital at the Western Front.

At the outbreak of World War I, 80% of the German army (consisting in the West of seven field armies) was deployed in the west according to the plan Aufmarsch II West. However, they were then assigned the operation of the retired deployment plan Aufmarsch I West, also known as the 'Schlieffen Plan'. This would march German armies through northern Belgium and into France, in an attempt to encircle the French army and then breach the 'second defensive area' of the fortresses of Verdun and Paris and the Marne river.[10]
German soldiers in a railway goods wagon on the way to the front in 1914. Early in the war, all sides expected the conflict to be a short one.

Aufmarsch I West was one of four deployment plans available to the German General Staff in 1914, each plan favouring but not specifying a certain operation that was well-known to the officers expected to carry it out under their own initiative with minimal oversight. Aufmarsch I West, designed for a one-front war with France, had been retired once it became clear that it was irrelevant to the wars Germany could expect to face; both Russia and Britain were expected to help France and there was no possibility of Italian nor Austro-Hungarian troops being available for operations against France. But despite its unsuitability, and the availability of more sensible and decisive options, it retained a certain allure that the other plans due to its offensive nature and the 'cult of the offensive' that held great sway over much pre-war thinking. Accordingly, the Aufmarsch II West deployment was repurposed to initiate the 'Schlieffen Plan' offensive despite the negligible chances of its then-unrealistic goals and the insufficient forces Germany had available.[45]

The plan called for the right flank of the German advance to bypass the French armies (which were concentrated on the Franco-German border, leaving the Belgian border without significant French forces) and move south to Paris. Initially the Germans were successful, particularly in the Battle of the Frontiers (14–24 August). By 12 September, the French, with assistance from the British forces, halted the German advance east of Paris at the First Battle of the Marne (5–12 September), and pushed the German forces back some 50 km (31 mi). The last days of this battle signified the end of mobile warfare in the west.[10] The French offensive into southern Alsace, launched on 20 August with the Battle of Mulhouse, had limited success.

In the east, the Russians invaded with two armies. In response, Germany rapidly moved the 8th Field Army, from its previous role as reserve for the invasion of France, to East Prussia by rail across the German Empire. This army, led by general Paul von Hindenburg defeated Russia in a series of battles collectively known as the First Battle of Tannenberg (17 August – 2 September). While the Russian invasion failed, it caused the diversion of German troops to the east, allowing the tactical Allied victory at the First Battle of the Marne. This meant that Germany failed to achieve its objective of avoiding a long two-front war. However, the German army had fought its way into a good defensive position inside France and effectively halved France's supply of coal. It had also killed or permanently crippled 230,000 more French and British troops than it itself had lost. Despite this, communications problems and questionable command decisions cost Germany the chance of a more decisive outcome.[46]
Asia and the Pacific
Military recruitment in Melbourne, Australia, 1914.
Main article: Asian and Pacific theatre of World War I

New Zealand occupied German Samoa (later Western Samoa) on 30 August 1914. On 11 September, the Australian Naval and Military Expeditionary Force landed on the island of Neu Pommern (later New Britain), which formed part of German New Guinea. On 28 October, the German cruiser SMS Emden sank the Russian cruiser Zhemchug in the Battle of Penang. Japan seized Germany's Micronesian colonies and, after the Siege of Tsingtao, the German coaling port of Qingdao on the Chinese Shandong peninsula. As Vienna refused to withdraw the Austro-Hungarian cruiser SMS Kaiserin Elisabeth from Tsingtao, Japan declared war not only on Germany, but also on Austria-Hungary; the ship participated in the defense of Tsingtao where it was sunk in November 1914.[47] Within a few months, the Allied forces had seized all the German territories in the Pacific; only isolated commerce raiders and a few holdouts in New Guinea remained.[48][49]
African campaigns
Main article: African theatre of World War I

Some of the first clashes of the war involved British, French, and German colonial forces in Africa. On 6–7 August, French and British troops invaded the German protectorate of Togoland and Kamerun. On 10 August, German forces in South-West Africa attacked South Africa; sporadic and fierce fighting continued for the rest of the war. The German colonial forces in German East Africa, led by Colonel Paul von Lettow-Vorbeck, fought a guerrilla warfare campaign during World War I and only surrendered two weeks after the armistice took effect in Europe.[50]
Indian support for the Allies
Further information: Third Anglo-Afghan War and Hindu–German Conspiracy

Contrary to British fears of a revolt in India, the outbreak of the war saw an unprecedented outpouring of loyalty and goodwill towards Britain.[51][52] Indian political leaders from the Indian National Congress and other groups were eager to support the British war effort, since they believed that strong support for the war effort would further the cause of Indian Home Rule. The Indian Army in fact outnumbered the British Army at the beginning of the war; about 1.3 million Indian soldiers and labourers served in Europe, Africa, and the Middle East, while the central government and the princely states sent large supplies of food, money, and ammunition. In all, 140,000 men served on the Western Front and nearly 700,000 in the Middle East. Casualties of Indian soldiers totalled 47,746 killed and 65,126 wounded during World War I.[53] The suffering engendered by the war, as well as the failure of the British government to grant self-government to India after the end of hostilities, bred disillusionment and fuelled the campaign for full independence that would be led by Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi and others.
Western Front
Main article: Western Front (World War I)
Trench warfare begins
Mud stained British soldiers at rest
Royal Irish Rifles in a communications trench, first day on the Somme, 1916.

Military tactics before World War I had failed to keep pace with advances in technology and had become obsolete. These advances had allowed the creation of strong defensive systems, which out-of-date military tactics could not break through for most of the war. Barbed wire was a significant hindrance to massed infantry advances, while artillery, vastly more lethal than in the 1870s, coupled with machine guns, made crossing open ground extremely difficult.[54] Commanders on both sides failed to develop tactics for breaching entrenched positions without heavy casualties. In time, however, technology began to produce new offensive weapons, such as gas warfare and the tank.[55]

Just after the First Battle of the Marne (5–12 September 1914), Entente and German forces repeatedly attempted manoeuvering to the north to outflank each other: this series of manoeuvres became known as the "Race to the Sea". When these outflanking efforts failed, Britain and France soon found themselves facing an uninterrupted line of entrenched German forces from Lorraine to Belgium's coast.[10] Britain and France sought to take the offensive, while Germany defended the occupied territories. Consequently, German trenches were much better constructed than those of their enemy; Anglo-French trenches were only intended to be "temporary" before their forces broke through the German defences.[56]

Both sides tried to break the stalemate using scientific and technological advances. On 22 April 1915, at the Second Battle of Ypres, the Germans (violating the Hague Convention) used chlorine gas for the first time on the Western Front. Several types of gas soon became widely used by both sides, and though it never proved a decisive, battle-winning weapon, poison gas became one of the most-feared and best-remembered horrors of the war.[57][58] Tanks were first used in combat by the British during the Battle of Flers-Courcelette (part of the wider Somme offensive) on 15 September 1916, with only partial success. However, their effectiveness would grow as the war progressed; the Germans employed only small numbers of their own design, supplemented by captured Allied tanks.
French 87th regiment near Verdun, 1916.
Continuation of trench warfare
Files of soldiers with rifles slung follow close behind a tank, there is a dead body in the foreground
Canadian troops advancing with a British Mark II tank at the Battle of Vimy Ridge, 1917.

Neither side proved able to deliver a decisive blow for the next two years. Throughout 1915–17, the British Empire and France suffered more casualties than Germany, because of both the strategic and tactical stances chosen by the sides. Strategically, while the Germans only mounted one major offensive, the Allies made several attempts to break through the German lines.

In February 1916 the Germans attacked the French defensive positions at Verdun. Lasting until December 1916, the battle saw initial German gains, before French counterattacks returned matters to near their starting point. Casualties were greater for the French, but the Germans bled heavily as well, with anywhere from 700,000[59] to 975,000[60] casualties suffered between the two combatants. Verdun became a symbol of French determination and self-sacrifice.[61]

The Battle of the Somme was an Anglo-French offensive that ran from July to November 1916. The opening of this offensive (1 July 1916) saw the British Army endure the bloodiest day in its history, suffering 57,470 casualties, including 19,240 dead, on the first day alone. The entire Somme offensive cost the British Army some 420,000 casualties. The French suffered another estimated 200,000 casualties, and the Germans an estimated 500,000.[62]

Protracted action at Verdun throughout 1916,[63] combined with the bloodletting at the Somme, brought the exhausted French army to the brink of collapse. Futile attempts at frontal assault came at a high price for both the British and the French and led to the widespread French Army Mutinies, after the failure of the costly Nivelle Offensive of April–May 1917.[64] The concurrent British Battle of Arras was more limited in scope, and more successful, although ultimately of little strategic value.[65][66] A smaller part of the Arras offensive, the capture of Vimy Ridge by the Canadian Corps, became highly significant to that country: the idea that Canada's national identity was born out of the battle is an opinion widely held in military and general histories of Canada.[67][68]

The last large-scale offensive of this period was a British attack (with French support) at Passchendaele (July–November 1917). This offensive opened with great promise for the Allies, before bogging down in the October mud. Casualties, though disputed, were roughly equal, at some 200,000–400,000 per side.

These years of trench warfare in the West saw no major exchanges of territory and, as a result, are often thought of as static and unchanging. However, throughout this period, British, French, and German tactics constantly evolved to meet new battlefield challenges.
Naval war
Battleships of the Hochseeflotte, 1917.
Main article: Naval warfare of World War I

At the start of the war, the German Empire had cruisers scattered across the globe, some of which were subsequently used to attack Allied merchant shipping. The British Royal Navy systematically hunted them down, though not without some embarrassment from its inability to protect Allied shipping. For example, the German detached light cruiser SMS Emden, part of the East-Asia squadron stationed at Qingdao, seized or destroyed 15 merchantmen, as well as sinking a Russian cruiser and a French destroyer. However, most of the German East-Asia squadron—consisting of the armoured cruisers Scharnhorst and Gneisenau, light cruisers Nürnberg and Leipzig and two transport ships—did not have orders to raid shipping and was instead underway to Germany when it met British warships. The German flotilla and Dresden sank two armoured cruisers at the Battle of Coronel, but was almost destroyed at the Battle of the Falkland Islands in December 1914, with only Dresden and a few auxiliaries escaping, but at the Battle of Más a Tierra these too were destroyed or interned.[69]

Soon after the outbreak of hostilities, Britain began a naval blockade of Germany. The strategy proved effective, cutting off vital military and civilian supplies, although this blockade violated accepted international law codified by several international agreements of the past two centuries.[70] Britain mined international waters to prevent any ships from entering entire sections of ocean, causing danger to even neutral ships.[71] Since there was limited response to this tactic, Germany expected a similar response to its unrestricted submarine warfare.[72]

The 1916 Battle of Jutland (German: Skagerrakschlacht, or "Battle of the Skagerrak") developed into the largest naval battle of the war, the only full-scale clash of battleships during the war, and one of the largest in history. It took place on 31 May – 1 June 1916, in the North Sea off Jutland. The Kaiserliche Marine's High Seas Fleet, commanded by Vice Admiral Reinhard Scheer, squared off against the Royal Navy's Grand Fleet, led by Admiral Sir John Jellicoe. The engagement was a stand off, as the Germans, outmanoeuvred by the larger British fleet, managed to escape and inflicted more damage to the British fleet than they received. Strategically, however, the British asserted their control of the sea, and the bulk of the German surface fleet remained confined to port for the duration of the war.[73]
U-155 exhibited near Tower Bridge in London, after the 1918 Armistice.

German U-boats attempted to cut the supply lines between North America and Britain.[74] The nature of submarine warfare meant that attacks often came without warning, giving the crews of the merchant ships little hope of survival.[74][75] The United States launched a protest, and Germany changed its rules of engagement. After the sinking of the passenger ship RMS Lusitania in 1915, Germany promised not to target passenger liners, while Britain armed its merchant ships, placing them beyond the protection of the "cruiser rules", which demanded warning and placing crews in "a place of safety" (a standard that lifeboats did not meet).[76] Finally, in early 1917, Germany adopted a policy of unrestricted submarine warfare, realising that the Americans would eventually enter the war.[74][77] Germany sought to strangle Allied sea lanes before the United States could transport a large army overseas, but could maintain only five long-range U-boats on station, to limited effect.[74]

The U-boat threat lessened in 1917, when merchant ships began travelling in convoys, escorted by destroyers. This tactic made it difficult for U-boats to find targets, which significantly lessened losses; after the hydrophone and depth charges were introduced, accompanying destroyers might attack a submerged submarine with some hope of success. Convoys slowed the flow of supplies, since ships had to wait as convoys were assembled. The solution to the delays was an extensive program of building new freighters. Troopships were too fast for the submarines and did not travel the North Atlantic in convoys.[78] The U-boats had sunk more than 5,000 Allied ships, at a cost of 199 submarines.[79] World War I also saw the first use of aircraft carriers in combat, with HMS Furious launching Sopwith Camels in a successful raid against the Zeppelin hangars at Tondern in July 1918, as well as blimps for antisubmarine patrol.[80]
Southern theatres
War in the Balkans
Main articles: Balkans Campaign (World War I), Bulgaria during World War I, Serbian Campaign (World War I) and Macedonian Front
Austro-Hungarian troops executing captured Serbians, 1917. Serbia lost about 850,000 people during the war, a quarter of its pre-war population.[81]

Faced with Russia, Austria-Hungary could spare only one-third of its army to attack Serbia. After suffering heavy losses, the Austrians briefly occupied the Serbian capital, Belgrade. A Serbian counterattack in the Battle of Kolubara, however, succeeded in driving them from the country by the end of 1914. For the first ten months of 1915, Austria-Hungary used most of its military reserves to fight Italy. German and Austro-Hungarian diplomats, however, scored a coup by persuading Bulgaria to join the attack on Serbia on 6 September 1915 in Pless.[82] The Austro-Hungarian provinces of Slovenia, Croatia and Bosnia provided troops for Austria-Hungary, invading Serbia as well as fighting Russia and Italy. Montenegro allied itself with Serbia.[83]
Refugee transport from Serbia in Leibnitz, Styria, 1914.

Serbia was conquered in a little more than a month, as the Central Powers, now including Bulgaria, sent in 600,000 troops. The Serbian army, fighting on two fronts and facing certain defeat, retreated into northern Albania. The Serbs suffered defeat in the Battle of Kosovo. Montenegro covered the Serbian retreat towards the Adriatic coast in the Battle of Mojkovac in 6–7 January 1916, but ultimately the Austrians conquered Montenegro, too. The surviving Serbian soldiers were evacuated by ship to Greece.[84] After conquest, Serbia was divided between Austro-Hungary and Bulgaria.

In late 1915, a Franco-British force landed at Salonica in Greece, to offer assistance and to pressure its government to declare war against the Central Powers. However, the pro-German King Constantine I dismissed the pro-Allied government of Eleftherios Venizelos before the Allied expeditionary force arrived.[85] The friction between the King of Greece and the Allies continued to accumulate with the National Schism, which effectively divided Greece between regions still loyal to the king and the new provisional government of Venizelos in Salonica. After intense negotiations and an armed confrontation in Athens between Allied and royalist forces (an incident known as Noemvriana), the King of Greece resigned and his second son Alexander took his place; Greece then officially joined the war on the side of the Allies.
Bulgarian soldiers in a trench, preparing to fire against an incoming airplane.

In the beginning, the Macedonian Front was mostly static. French and Serbian forces retook limited areas of Macedonia by recapturing Bitola on 19 November 1916 following the costly Monastir Offensive, which brought stabilization of the front.

Serbian and French troops finally made a breakthrough in September 1918, after most of the German and Austro-Hungarian troops had been withdrawn. The Bulgarians suffered their only defeat of the war at the Battle of Dobro Pole. Bulgaria capitulated two weeks later, on 29 September 1918.[86] The German high command responded by despatching troops to hold the line, but these forces were far too weak to reestablish a front.[87]

The disappearance of the Macedonian Front meant that the road to Budapest and Vienna was now opened to Allied forces. Hindenburg and Ludendorff concluded that the strategic and operational balance had now shifted decidedly against the Central Powers and, a day after the Bulgarian collapse, insisted on an immediate peace settlement.[88]
Ottoman Empire
Main article: Middle Eastern theatre of World War I

The Ottoman Empire joined the Central Powers in the war, the secret Ottoman–German Alliance having been signed in August 1914.[89] The Ottomans threatened Russia's Caucasian territories and Britain's communications with India via the Suez Canal.

As the war progressed, the Ottoman Empire took advantage of the European powers' preoccupation with the war and conducted large-scale ethnic cleansing of the indigenous Greek, Assyrian and Armenian Christian populations, known as the Greek genocide, Assyrian Genocide and Armenian genocide.[90][91][92]

The British and French opened overseas fronts with the Gallipoli (1915) and Mesopotamian campaigns. In Gallipoli, the Ottoman Empire successfully repelled the British, French, and Australian and New Zealand Army Corps (ANZACs). In Mesopotamia, by contrast, after the disastrous Siege of Kut (1915–16), British Imperial forces reorganised and captured Baghdad in March 1917. The British were aided in Mesopotamia by local Arab and Assyrian tribesmen, while the Ottomans employed local Kurdish and Turcoman tribes.
Foreground, a battery of 16 heavy guns. Background, conical tents and support vehicles.
British artillery battery on Mount Scopus in the Battle of Jerusalem, 1917.

Further to the west, the Suez Canal was successfully defended from Ottoman attacks in 1915 and 1916; in August, a joint German and Ottoman force was defeated at the Battle of Romani by the ANZAC Mounted and the 52nd (Lowland) Infantry Divisions. Following this victory, a British Empire Egyptian Expeditionary Force advanced across the Sinai Peninsula, pushing Ottoman forces back in the Battle of Magdhaba in December and the Battle of Rafa on the border between the Egyptian Sinai and Ottoman Palestine in January 1917.
Russian forest trench at the 1914–1915 Battle of Sarikamish.
Xmas card from British Mesopotamian Expeditionary Force with list of engagements, Basra, 1917

Russian armies generally had the best of it in the Caucasus. Enver Pasha, supreme commander of the Ottoman armed forces, was ambitious and dreamed of re-conquering central Asia and areas that had been lost to Russia previously. He was, however, a poor commander.[93] He launched an offensive against the Russians in the Caucasus in December 1914 with 100,000 troops; insisting on a frontal attack against mountainous Russian positions in winter, he lost 86% of his force at the Battle of Sarikamish.[94]

In December 1914 the Ottoman Empire, with German support, invaded Persia (modern Iran) in an effort to cut off British and Russian access to petroleum reservoirs around Baku near the Caspian Sea.[95] Persia, ostensibly neutral, had long been under the spheres of British and Russian influence. The Ottomans and Germans were aided by Kurdish and Azeri forces, together with a large number of major Iranian tribes, such as the Qashqai, Tangistanis, Luristanis, and Khamseh, while the Russians and British had the support of Assyrian and Armenian forces. The Persian Campaign was to last until 1918 and end in failure for the Ottomans and their allies, however the Russian withdrawal from the war in 1917 led to Armenian and Assyrian forces, who had hitherto inflicted a series of defeats upon the forces of the Ottomans and their allies, being cut off from supply lines, outnumbered, outgunned and isolated, forcing them to fight and flee towards British lines in northern Mesopotamia.[96]

General Yudenich, the Russian commander from 1915 to 1916, drove the Turks out of most of the southern Caucasus with a string of victories.[94] In 1917, Russian Grand Duke Nicholas assumed command of the Caucasus front. Nicholas planned a railway from Russian Georgia to the conquered territories, so that fresh supplies could be brought up for a new offensive in 1917. However, in March 1917 (February in the pre-revolutionary Russian calendar), the Czar abdicated in the course of the February Revolution and the Russian Caucasus Army began to fall apart.

Instigated by the Arab bureau of the British Foreign Office, the Arab Revolt started June 1916 at the Battle of Mecca, led by Sherif Hussein of Mecca, and ended with the Ottoman surrender of Damascus. Fakhri Pasha, the Ottoman commander of Medina, resisted for more than two and half years during the Siege of Medina.[97]

Along the border of Italian Libya and British Egypt, the Senussi tribe, incited and armed by the Turks, waged a small-scale guerrilla war against Allied troops. The British were forced to dispatch 12,000 troops to oppose them in the Senussi Campaign. Their rebellion was finally crushed in mid-1916.[98]

Total Allied casualties on the Ottoman fronts amounted 650,000 men. Total Ottoman casualties were 725,000 (325,000 dead and 400,000 wounded).[99]
Italian participation
Austro-Hungarian troops, Tyrol.
Depiction of the Battle of Doberdò, fought in August 1916 between the Italian and the Austro-Hungarian armies.
Main articles: Italian Campaign (World War I) and Albania during World War I
Further information: Battles of the Isonzo

Italy had been allied with the German and Austro-Hungarian Empires since 1882 as part of the Triple Alliance. However, the nation had its own designs on Austrian territory in Trentino, the Austrian Littoral, Fiume (Rijeka) and Dalmatia. Rome had a secret 1902 pact with France, effectively nullifying its alliance.[100] At the start of hostilities, Italy refused to commit troops, arguing that the Triple Alliance was defensive and that Austria-Hungary was an aggressor. The Austro-Hungarian government began negotiations to secure Italian neutrality, offering the French colony of Tunisia in return. The Allies made a counter-offer in which Italy would receive the Southern Tyrol, Austrian Littoral and territory on the Dalmatian coast after the defeat of Austria-Hungary. This was formalised by the Treaty of London. Further encouraged by the Allied invasion of Turkey in April 1915, Italy joined the Triple Entente and declared war on Austria-Hungary on 23 May. Fifteen months later, Italy declared war on Germany.

Italy's entry was engineered in secret by three individuals—the Prime Minister, Antonio Salandra, the Foreign Minister, Sidney Sonnino, and King Victor Emmanuel III.

    On February 16, 1915, despite concurrent negotiations with Austria, a courier was dispatched in great secrecy to London with the suggestion that Italy was open to a good offer from the Entente. ... The final choice was aided by the arrival of news in March of Russian victories in the Carpathians. Salandra began to think that victory for the Entente was in sight, and was so anxious not to arrive too late for a share in the profits that he instructed his envoy in London to drop some demands and reach agreement quickly. ... The Treaty of London was concluded on April 26 binding Italy to fight within one month. ... Not until May 4 did Salandra denounce the Triple Alliance in a private note to its signatories.[101]

Militarily, the Italians had numerical superiority. This advantage, however, was lost, not only because of the difficult terrain in which fighting took place, but also because of the strategies and tactics employed. Field Marshal Luigi Cadorna, a staunch proponent of the frontal assault, had dreams of breaking into the Slovenian plateau, taking Ljubljana and threatening Vienna. Cadorna's plan did not take into account the difficulties of the rugged Alpine and Karstic terrain, or the technological changes that created trench warfare, giving rise to a series of bloody and inconclusive stalemated offensives.

On the Trentino front, the Austro-Hungarians took advantage of the mountainous terrain, which favoured the defender. After an initial strategic retreat, the front remained largely unchanged, while Austrian Kaiserschützen and Standschützen engaged Italian Alpini in bitter hand-to-hand combat throughout the summer. The Austro-Hungarians counterattacked in the Altopiano of Asiago, towards Verona and Padua, in the spring of 1916 (Strafexpedition), but made little progress.

Beginning in 1915, the Italians under Cadorna mounted eleven offensives on the Isonzo front along the Isonzo (Soča) River, northeast of Trieste. All eleven offensives were repelled by the Austro-Hungarians, who held the higher ground. In the summer of 1916, after the Battle of Doberdò, the Italians captured the town of Gorizia. After this minor victory, the front remained static for over a year, despite several Italian offensives, centred on the Banjšice and Karst Plateau east of Gorizia. In the autumn of 1917, thanks to the improving situation on the Eastern Front, the Austro-Hungarian troops received large numbers of reinforcements, including German Stormtroopers and the elite Alpenkorps.

The Central Powers launched a crushing offensive on 26 October 1917, spearheaded by the Germans. They achieved a victory at Caporetto (Kobarid). The Italian Army was routed and retreated more than 100 kilometres (62 mi) to reorganise, stabilising the front at the Piave River. Since the Italian Army had suffered heavy losses in the Battle of Caporetto, the Italian Government called to arms the so-called '99 Boys (Ragazzi del '99): that is, all males born on 1899 and after, and so were 18 years old or older. In 1918, the Austro-Hungarians failed to break through in a series of battles on the Piave River, and were finally decisively defeated in the Battle of Vittorio Veneto in October of that year. On 1 November, the Italian Navy destroyed much of the Austro-Hungarian fleet stationed in Pula, preventing it from being handed over to the new State of Slovenes, Croats and Serbs. On 3 November, the Italians occupied Trieste from the sea. On the same day, the Armistice of Villa Giusti was signed. By mid-November 1918, the Italian military occupied the entire former Austrian Littoral, and had seized control of the entire portion of Dalmatia that had been guaranteed to Italy by the London Pact.[102] By the end of hostilities in November 1918,[103] In 1918, Admiral Enrico Millo declared himself Italy's Governor of Dalmatia.[103] Austria-Hungary surrendered in early November 1918.[104][105]
Romanian participation
Main article: Romania during World War I
Marshal Joffre inspecting Romanian troops, 1916.

Romania had been allied with the Central Powers since 1882. When the war began, however, it declared its neutrality, arguing that because Austria-Hungary had itself declared war on Serbia, Romania was under no obligation to join the war. When the Entente Powers promised Romania large territories of eastern Hungary (Transylvania and Banat), which had a large Romanian population, in exchange for Romania's declaring war on the Central Powers, the Romanian government renounced its neutrality and, on 27 August 1916, the Romanian Army launched an attack against Austria-Hungary, with limited Russian support. The Romanian offensive was initially successful, pushing back the Austro-Hungarian troops in Transylvania, but a counterattack by the forces of the Central Powers drove back the Russo-Romanian forces.[106] As a result of the Battle of Bucharest, the Central Powers occupied Bucharest on 6 December 1916. Fighting in Moldova continued in 1917, resulting in a costly stalemate for the Central Powers.[107][108] Russian withdrawal from the war in late 1917 as a result of the October Revolution meant that Romania was forced to sign an armistice with the Central Powers on 9 December 1917.
Romanian troops during the Battle of Mărăşeşti, 1917.

In January 1918, Romanian forces established control over Bessarabia as the Russian Army abandoned the province. Although a treaty was signed by the Romanian and the Bolshevik Russian governments following talks from 5–9 March 1918 on the withdrawal of Romanian forces from Bessarabia within two months, on 27 March 1918 Romania attached Bessarabia to its territory, formally based on a resolution passed by the local assembly of that territory on its unification with Romania.

Romania officially made peace with the Central Powers by signing the Treaty of Bucharest on 7 May 1918. Under that treaty, Romania was obliged to end the war with the Central Powers and make small territorial concessions to Austria-Hungary, ceding control of some passes in the Carpathian Mountains, and to grant oil concessions to Germany. In exchange, the Central Powers recognised the sovereignty of Romania over Bessarabia. The treaty was renounced in October 1918 by the Alexandru Marghiloman government, and Romania nominally re-entered the war on 10 November 1918. The next day, the Treaty of Bucharest was nullified by the terms of the Armistice of Compiègne.[109][110] Total Romanian deaths from 1914 to 1918, military and civilian, within contemporary borders, were estimated at 748,000.[111]
Eastern Front
Main article: Eastern Front (World War I)
Initial actions
Russian troops in a trench, awaiting a German attack, 1917.

While the Western Front had reached stalemate, the war continued in East Europe. Initial Russian plans called for simultaneous invasions of Austrian Galicia and German East Prussia. Although Russia's initial advance into Galicia was largely successful, it was driven back from East Prussia by Hindenburg and Ludendorff at Tannenberg and the Masurian Lakes in August and September 1914.[112][113] Russia's less developed industrial base and ineffective military leadership was instrumental in the events that unfolded. By the spring of 1915, the Russians had retreated to Galicia, and, in May, the Central Powers achieved a remarkable breakthrough on Poland's southern frontiers.[114] On 5 August, they captured Warsaw and forced the Russians to withdraw from Poland.
Russian Revolution
Main article: Russian Revolution

Despite the success of the June 1916 Brusilov Offensive in eastern Galicia,[115] dissatisfaction with the Russian government's conduct of the war grew. The offensive's success was undermined by the reluctance of other generals to commit their forces to support the victory. Allied and Russian forces were revived only temporarily by Romania's entry into the war on 27 August. German forces came to the aid of embattled Austro-Hungarian units in Transylvania while a German-Bulgarian force attacked from the south, and Bucharest fell to the Central Powers on 6 December. Meanwhile, unrest grew in Russia, as the Tsar remained at the front. Empress Alexandra's increasingly incompetent rule drew protests and resulted in the murder of her favourite, Rasputin, at the end of 1916.

In March 1917, demonstrations in Petrograd culminated in the abdication of Tsar Nicholas II and the appointment of a weak Provisional Government, which shared power with the Petrograd Soviet socialists. This arrangement led to confusion and chaos both at the front and at home. The army became increasingly ineffective.[114]
Treaty of Brest-Litovsk, 1918.
1. Count Ottokar von Czernin
2. Richard von Kühlmann
3. Vasil Radoslavov

Discontent and the weaknesses of the Provisional Government led to a rise in the popularity of the Bolshevik Party, led by Vladimir Lenin, which demanded an immediate end to the war. The successful armed uprising by the Bolsheviks of November was followed in December by an armistice and negotiations with Germany. At first, the Bolsheviks refused the German terms, but when German troops began marching across the Ukraine unopposed, the new government acceded to the Treaty of Brest-Litovsk on 3 March 1918. The treaty ceded vast territories, including Finland, the Baltic provinces, parts of Poland and Ukraine to the Central Powers.[116] Despite this enormous apparent German success, the manpower required for German occupation of former Russian territory may have contributed to the failure of the Spring Offensive and secured relatively little food or other materiel for the Central Powers war effort.

With the adoption of the Treaty of Brest-Litovsk, the Entente no longer existed. The Allied powers led a small-scale invasion of Russia, partly to stop Germany from exploiting Russian resources, and to a lesser extent, to support the "Whites" (as opposed to the "Reds") in the Russian Civil War.[117] Allied troops landed in Arkhangelsk and in Vladivostok as part of the North Russia Intervention.
Czechoslovak Legion
Czechoslovak Legion, Vladivostok, 1918.
Main article: Czechoslovak Legion

The Czechoslovak Legion fought with the Entente; their goal was to win support for the independence of Czechoslovakia. The Legion in Russia was established in 1917, in December 1917 in France (including volunteers from America) and in April 1918 in Italy. Czechoslovak Legion troops defeated the Austro-Hungarian army at the Ukrainian village Zborov in July 1917. After this success, the number of Czechoslovak legionaries increased, as well as Czechoslovak military power. In the Battle of Bakhmach, the Legion defeated the Germans and forced them to make a truce.

In Russia, they were heavily involved in the Russian Civil War fighting the Bolsheviks, at times controlling most of the Trans-Siberian railway and conquering all major cities in Siberia. The presence of the Czechoslovak Legion near the Yekaterinburg appears to have been one of the motivating forces for the Bolshevik execution of the Tsar and his family in July 1918. Legionaries came less than a week afterwards and captured the city.

Because Russia's European ports were not safe, the corps was to be evacuated by a long detour via the port of Vladivostok. The last transport was the American ship Heffron in September 1920.
Central Powers proposal for starting peace negotiations
"They shall not pass", a phrase typically associated with the defense of Verdun.

In December 1916, after ten brutal months of the Battle of Verdun and a successful offensive against Romania, the Germans attempted to negotiate a peace with the Allies. Soon after, the US president, Woodrow Wilson, attempted to intervene as a peacemaker, asking in a note for both sides to state their demands. Lloyd George's War Cabinet considered the German offer to be a ploy to create divisions amongst the Allies. After initial outrage and much deliberation, they took Wilson's note as a separate effort, signalling that the United States was on the verge of entering the war against Germany following the "submarine outrages". While the Allies debated a response to Wilson's offer, the Germans chose to rebuff it in favour of "a direct exchange of views". Learning of the German response, the Allied governments were free to make clear demands in their response of 14 January. They sought restoration of damages, the evacuation of occupied territories, reparations for France, Russia and Romania, and a recognition of the principle of nationalities. This included the liberation of Italians, Slavs, Romanians, Czecho-Slovaks, and the creation of a "free and united Poland". On the question of security, the Allies sought guarantees that would prevent or limit future wars, complete with sanctions, as a condition of any peace settlement.[118] The negotiations failed and the Entente powers rejected the German offer, because Germany did not state any specific proposals. To Wilson, the Entente powers stated that they would not start peace negotiations until the Central powers evacuated all occupied Allied territories and provided indemnities for all damage which had been done.[119]
1917–1918
Developments in 1917
German film crew recording the action.

Events of 1917 proved decisive in ending the war, although their effects were not fully felt until 1918.

The British naval blockade began to have a serious impact on Germany. In response, in February 1917, the German General Staff convinced Chancellor Theobald von Bethmann-Hollweg to declare unrestricted submarine warfare, with the goal of starving Britain out of the war. German planners estimated that unrestricted submarine warfare would cost Britain a monthly shipping loss of 600,000 tons. The General Staff acknowledged that the policy would almost certainly bring the United States into the conflict, but calculated that British shipping losses would be so high that they would be forced to sue for peace after 5 to 6 months, before American intervention could make an impact. In reality, tonnage sunk rose above 500,000 tons per month from February to July. It peaked at 860,000 tons in April. After July, the newly re-introduced convoy system became extremely effective in reducing the U-boat threat. Britain was safe from starvation, while German industrial output fell and the United States troops joined the war in large numbers far earlier than Germany had anticipated.
Haut-Rhin, France, 1917.

On 3 May 1917, during the Nivelle Offensive, the weary French 2nd Colonial Division, veterans of the Battle of Verdun, refused orders, arriving drunk and without their weapons. Their officers lacked the means to punish an entire division, and harsh measures were not immediately implemented. The French Army Mutinies eventually spread to a further 54 French divisions and saw 20,000 men desert. However, appeals to patriotism and duty, as well as mass arrests and trials, encouraged the soldiers to return to defend their trenches, although the French soldiers refused to participate in further offensive action.[120] Robert Nivelle was removed from command by 15 May, replaced by General Philippe Pétain, who suspended bloody large-scale attacks.

The victory of Austria-Hungary and Germany at the Battle of Caporetto led the Allies to convene the Rapallo Conference at which they formed the Supreme War Council to coordinate planning. Previously, British and French armies had operated under separate commands.

In December, the Central Powers signed an armistice with Russia. This released large numbers of German troops for use in the west. With German reinforcements and new American troops pouring in, the outcome was to be decided on the Western Front. The Central Powers knew that they could not win a protracted war, but they held high hopes for success based on a final quick offensive. Furthermore, the leaders of the Central Powers and the Allies became increasingly fearful of social unrest and revolution in Europe. Thus, both sides urgently sought a decisive victory.[121]

In 1917, Emperor Charles I of Austria secretly attempted separate peace negotiations with Clemenceau, through his wife's brother Sixtus in Belgium as an intermediary, without the knowledge of Germany. Italy opposed the proposals. When the negotiations failed, his attempt was revealed to Germany resulting in a diplomatic catastrophe.[122][123]
Ottoman Empire conflict, 1917–1918
Main article: Sinai and Palestine Campaign
British troops on the march in Mesopotamia, 1917.

In March and April 1917, at the First and Second Battles of Gaza, German and Ottoman forces stopped the advance of the Egyptian Expeditionary Force, which had begun in August 1916 at Romani. At the end of October, the Sinai and Palestine Campaign resumed, when General Edmund Allenby's XXth Corps, XXI Corps and Desert Mounted Corps won the Battle of Beersheba. Two Ottoman armies were defeated a few weeks later at the Battle of Mughar Ridge and, early in December, Jerusalem was captured following another Ottoman defeat at the Battle of Jerusalem (1917). About this time, Friedrich Freiherr Kress von Kressenstein was relieved of his duties as the Eighth Army's commander, replaced by Djevad Pasha, and a few months later the commander of the Ottoman Army in Palestine, Erich von Falkenhayn, was replaced by Otto Liman von Sanders.

Early in 1918, the front line was extended into the Jordan Valley, was occupied, following the First Transjordan and the Second Transjordan attack by British Empire forces in March and April 1918. During March, most of the Egyptian Expeditionary Force's British infantry and Yeomanry cavalry were sent to fight on the Western Front as a consequence of the Spring Offensive. They were replaced by Indian Army units. During several months of reorganisation and training during the summer, a number of attacks were carried out on sections of the Ottoman front line. These pushed the front line north to more advantageous positions in preparation for an attack and to acclimatise the newly arrived Indian Army infantry. It was not until the middle of September that the integrated force was ready for large-scale operations.

The reorganised Egyptian Expeditionary Force, with an additional mounted division, broke Ottoman forces at the Battle of Megiddo in September 1918. In two days the British and Indian infantry, supported by a creeping barrage, broke the Ottoman front line and captured the headquarters of the Eighth Army (Ottoman Empire) at Tulkarm, the continuous trench lines at Tabsor, Arara and the Seventh Army (Ottoman Empire) headquarters at Nablus. The Desert Mounted Corps rode through the break in the front line created by the infantry and, during virtually continuous operations by Australian Light Horse, British mounted Yeomanry, Indian Lancers and New Zealand Mounted Rifle brigades in the Jezreel Valley, they captured Nazareth, Afulah and Beisan, Jenin, along with Haifa on the Mediterranean coast and Daraa east of the Jordan River on the Hejaz railway. Samakh and Tiberias on the Sea of Galilee, were captured on the way northwards to Damascus. Meanwhile, Chaytor's Force of Australian light horse, New Zealand mounted rifles, Indian, British West Indies and Jewish infantry captured the crossings of the Jordan River, Es Salt, Amman and at Ziza most of the Fourth Army (Ottoman Empire). The Armistice of Mudros, signed at the end of October, ended hostilities with the Ottoman Empire when fighting was continuing north of Aleppo.
Entry of the United States
Main article: American entry into World War I
President Wilson before Congress, announcing the break in official relations with Germany on 3 February 1917.

At the outbreak of the war, the United States pursued a policy of non-intervention, avoiding conflict while trying to broker a peace. When the German U-boat SM U-20 sank the British liner RMS Lusitania on 7 May 1915 with 128 Americans among the dead, President Woodrow Wilson insisted that "America is too proud to fight" but demanded an end to attacks on passenger ships. Germany complied. Wilson unsuccessfully tried to mediate a settlement. However, he also repeatedly warned that the United States would not tolerate unrestricted submarine warfare, in violation of international law. The former president Theodore Roosevelt denounced German acts as "piracy".[124] Wilson was narrowly reelected in 1916 as his supporters emphasized "he kept us out of war".

In January 1917, Germany resumed unrestricted submarine warfare, realizing it would mean American entry. The German Foreign Minister, in the Zimmermann Telegram, invited Mexico to join the war as Germany's ally against the United States. In return, the Germans would finance Mexico's war and help it recover the territories of Texas, New Mexico, and Arizona.[125] The United Kingdom intercepted the message and presented it to the US embassy in the UK. From there it made its way to President Wilson who released the Zimmermann note to the public, and Americans saw it as casus belli. Wilson called on antiwar elements to end all wars, by winning this one and eliminating militarism from the globe. He argued that the war was so important that the US had to have a voice in the peace conference.[126] After the sinking of seven US merchant ships by submarines and the publication of the Zimmermann telegram, Wilson called for war on Germany,[127] which the US Congress declared on 6 April 1917.

The United States was never formally a member of the Allies but became a self-styled "Associated Power". The United States had a small army, but, after the passage of the Selective Service Act, it drafted 2.8 million men,[128] and, by summer 1918, was sending 10,000 fresh soldiers to France every day. In 1917, the US Congress gave US citizenship to Puerto Ricans when they were drafted to participate in World War I, as part of the Jones Act. Germany had miscalculated, believing it would be many more months before American soldiers would arrive and that their arrival could be stopped by U-boats.[129]

The United States Navy sent a battleship group to Scapa Flow to join with the British Grand Fleet, destroyers to Queenstown, Ireland, and submarines to help guard convoys. Several regiments of US Marines were also dispatched to France. The British and French wanted American units used to reinforce their troops already on the battle lines and not waste scarce shipping on bringing over supplies. General John J. Pershing, American Expeditionary Forces (AEF) commander, refused to break up American units to be used as reinforcements for British Empire and French units. As an exception, he did allow African-American combat regiments to be used in French divisions. The Harlem Hellfighters fought as part of the French 16th Division, and earned a unit Croix de Guerre for their actions at Château-Thierry, Belleau Wood, and Sechault.[130] AEF doctrine called for the use of frontal assaults, which had long since been discarded by British Empire and French commanders because of the large loss of life.[131]
German Spring Offensive of 1918
Main article: Spring Offensive
British 55th Infantry Division soldiers, blinded by tear gas during the Battle of Estaires, 10 April 1918.
French soldiers under General Gouraud, with machine guns amongst the ruins of a cathedral near the Marne, 1918.

German General Erich Ludendorff drew up plans (codenamed Operation Michael) for the 1918 offensive on the Western Front. The Spring Offensive sought to divide the British and French forces with a series of feints and advances. The German leadership hoped to end the war before significant US forces arrived. The operation commenced on 21 March 1918, with an attack on British forces near Amiens. German forces achieved an unprecedented advance of 60 kilometres (37 mi).[132]

British and French trenches were penetrated using novel infiltration tactics, also named Hutier tactics, after General Oskar von Hutier, by specially trained units called stormtroopers. Previously, attacks had been characterised by long artillery bombardments and massed assaults. However, in the Spring Offensive of 1918, Ludendorff used artillery only briefly and infiltrated small groups of infantry at weak points. They attacked command and logistics areas and bypassed points of serious resistance. More heavily armed infantry then destroyed these isolated positions. This German success relied greatly on the element of surprise.[133]

The front moved to within 120 kilometres (75 mi) of Paris. Three heavy Krupp railway guns fired 183 shells on the capital, causing many Parisians to flee. The initial offensive was so successful that Kaiser Wilhelm II declared 24 March a national holiday. Many Germans thought victory was near. After heavy fighting, however, the offensive was halted. Lacking tanks or motorised artillery, the Germans were unable to consolidate their gains. This situation was not helped by the now stretched supply lines as a result of their rapid advance over devastated ground.[134]

General Foch pressed to use the arriving American troops as individual replacements, whereas Pershing sought to field American units as an independent force. These units were assigned to the depleted French and British Empire commands on 28 March. A Supreme War Council of Allied forces was created at the Doullens Conference on 5 November 1917.[135] General Foch was appointed as supreme commander of the Allied forces. Haig, Petain, and Pershing retained tactical control of their respective armies; Foch assumed a coordinating rather than a directing role, and the British, French, and US commands operated largely independently.[135]

Following Operation Michael, Germany launched Operation Georgette against the northern English Channel ports. The Allies halted the drive after limited territorial gains by Germany. The German Army to the south then conducted Operations Blücher and Yorck, pushing broadly towards Paris. Operation Marne was launched on 15 July, in an attempt to encircle Reims and beginning the Second Battle of the Marne. The resulting counterattack, which started the Hundred Days Offensive, marked the first successful Allied offensive of the war.

By 20 July, the Germans had retreated across the Marne to their starting lines,[136] having achieved little, and the German Army never regained the initiative. German casualties between March and April 1918 were 270,000, including many highly trained storm troopers.

Meanwhile, Germany was falling apart at home. Anti-war marches became frequent and morale in the army fell. Industrial output was 53% of 1913 levels.
New states under war zone

In the late spring of 1918, three new states were formed in the South Caucasus: the First Republic of Armenia, the Azerbaijan Democratic Republic, and the Democratic Republic of Georgia, which declared their independence from the Russian Empire.[137] Two other minor entities were established, the Centrocaspian Dictatorship and South West Caucasian Republic (the former was liquidated by Azerbaijan in the autumn of 1918 and the latter by a joint Armenian-British task force in early 1919). With the withdrawal of the Russian armies from the Caucasus front in the winter of 1917–18, the three major republics braced for an imminent Ottoman advance, which commenced in the early months of 1918. Solidarity was briefly maintained when the Transcaucasian Federative Republic was created in the spring of 1918, but this collapsed in May, when the Georgians asked and received protection from Germany and the Azerbaijanis concluded a treaty with the Ottoman Empire that was more akin to a military alliance. Armenia was left to fend for itself and struggled for five months against the threat of a full-fledged occupation by the Ottoman Turks.[137]
Allied victory: summer 1918 onwards
Allies increased their front-line rifle strength while German strength fell in half in 1918[138]
Hundred Days Offensive
Main articles: Hundred Days Offensive and Weimar Republic
Aerial view of ruins of Vaux-devant-Damloup, France, 1918.

The Allied counteroffensive, known as the Hundred Days Offensive, began on 8 August 1918, with the Battle of Amiens. The battle involved over 400 tanks and 120,000 British, Dominion, and French troops, and by the end of its first day a gap 15 mi (24 km) long had been created in the German lines. The defenders displayed a marked collapse in morale, causing Erich Ludendorff to refer to this day as the "Black Day of the German army".[139][140] After an advance as far as 14 miles (23 km), German resistance stiffened, and the battle was concluded on 12 August.

Rather than continuing the Amiens battle past the point of initial success, as had been done so many times in the past, the Allies shifted their attention elsewhere. Allied leaders had now realised that to continue an attack after resistance had hardened was a waste of lives, and it was better to turn a line than to try to roll over it. They began to undertake attacks in quick order to take advantage of successful advances on the flanks, then broke them off when each attack lost its initial impetus.[141]
Canadian Scottish, advancing during the Battle of the Canal du Nord, 1918.

British and Dominion forces launched the next phase of the campaign with the Battle of Albert on 21 August.[142] The assault was widened by French[143] and then further British forces in the following days. During the last week of August the pressure along a 70-mile (113 km) front against the enemy was heavy and unrelenting. From German accounts, "Each day was spent in bloody fighting against an ever and again on-storming enemy, and nights passed without sleep in retirements to new lines."[141]

Faced with these advances, on 2 September the German Oberste Heeresleitung (OHL) issued orders to withdraw to the Hindenburg Line in the south. This ceded without a fight the salient seized the previous April.[144] According to Ludendorff "We had to admit the necessity ... to withdraw the entire front from the Scarpe to the Vesle."[145]

September saw the Allied advance to the Hindenburg Line in the north and centre. The Germans continued to fight strong rear-guard actions and launched numerous counterattacks on lost positions, but only a few succeeded, and then only temporarily. Contested towns, villages, heights, and trenches in the screening positions and outposts of the Hindenburg Line continued to fall to the Allies, with the BEF alone taking 30,441 prisoners in the last week of September. On 24 September an assault by both the British and French came within 2 miles (3.2 km) of St. Quentin.[143] The Germans had now retreated to positions at or behind the Hindenburg Line.
An American major, piloting an observation balloon near the front, 1918.

In nearly four weeks of fighting beginning 8 August, over 100,000 German prisoners were taken, 75,000 by the BEF and the rest by the French. As of "The Black Day of the German Army", the German High Command realised that the war was lost and made attempts to reach a satisfactory end. The day after that battle, Ludendorff said: "We cannot win the war any more, but we must not lose it either." On 11 August he offered his resignation to the Kaiser, who refused it, replying, "I see that we must strike a balance. We have nearly reached the limit of our powers of resistance. The war must be ended." On 13 August, at Spa, Hindenburg, Ludendorff, the Chancellor, and Foreign Minister Hintz agreed that the war could not be ended militarily and, on the following day, the German Crown Council decided that victory in the field was now most improbable. Austria and Hungary warned that they could only continue the war until December, and Ludendorff recommended immediate peace negotiations. Prince Rupprecht warned Prince Max of Baden: "Our military situation has deteriorated so rapidly that I no longer believe we can hold out over the winter; it is even possible that a catastrophe will come earlier." On 10 September Hindenburg urged peace moves to Emperor Charles of Austria, and Germany appealed to the Netherlands for mediation. On 14 September Austria sent a note to all belligerents and neutrals suggesting a meeting for peace talks on neutral soil, and on 15 September Germany made a peace offer to Belgium. Both peace offers were rejected, and on 24 September OHL informed the leaders in Berlin that armistice talks were inevitable.[143]

The final assault on the Hindenburg Line began with the Meuse-Argonne Offensive, launched by French and American troops on 26 September. The following week, cooperating French and American units broke through in Champagne at the Battle of Blanc Mont Ridge, forcing the Germans off the commanding heights, and closing towards the Belgian frontier.[146] On 8 October the line was pierced again by British and Dominion troops at the Battle of Cambrai.[147] The German army had to shorten its front and use the Dutch frontier as an anchor to fight rear-guard actions as it fell back towards Germany.

When Bulgaria signed a separate armistice on 29 September, Ludendorff, having been under great stress for months, suffered something similar to a breakdown. It was evident that Germany could no longer mount a successful defence.[148][149]
Men of US 64th Regiment, 7th Infantry Division, celebrate the news of the Armistice, 11 November 1918.

Meanwhile, news of Germany's impending military defeat spread throughout the German armed forces. The threat of mutiny was rife. Admiral Reinhard Scheer and Ludendorff decided to launch a last attempt to restore the "valour" of the German Navy. Knowing the government of Prince Maximilian of Baden would veto any such action, Ludendorff decided not to inform him. Nonetheless, word of the impending assault reached sailors at Kiel. Many, refusing to be part of a naval offensive, which they believed to be suicidal, rebelled and were arrested. Ludendorff took the blame; the Kaiser dismissed him on 26 October. The collapse of the Balkans meant that Germany was about to lose its main supplies of oil and food. Its reserves had been used up, even as US troops kept arriving at the rate of 10,000 per day.[150] The Americans supplied more than 80% of Allied oil during the war, meaning no such loss of supplies could affect the Allied effort.[151]

With the military faltering and with widespread loss of confidence in the Kaiser, Germany moved towards peace. Prince Maximilian of Baden took charge of a new government as Chancellor of Germany to negotiate with the Allies. Negotiations with President Wilson began immediately, in the hope that he would offer better terms than the British and French. Wilson demanded a constitutional monarchy and parliamentary control over the German military.[152] There was no resistance when the Social Democrat Philipp Scheidemann on 9 November declared Germany to be a republic. The Kaiser, kings and other hereditary rulers all were removed from power. Imperial Germany was dead; a new Germany had been born: the Weimar Republic.[153]
Armistices and capitulations
Main article: Armistice of 11 November 1918
Ferdinand Foch, second from right, pictured outside the carriage in Compiègne after agreeing to the armistice that ended the war there. The carriage was later chosen by Nazi Germany as the symbolic setting of Pétain's June 1940 armistice.[154]

The collapse of the Central Powers came swiftly. Bulgaria was the first to sign an armistice, on 29 September 1918 at Saloniki.[155] On 30 October, the Ottoman Empire capitulated, signing the Armistice of Mudros.[155]

On 24 October, the Italians began a push that rapidly recovered territory lost after the Battle of Caporetto. This culminated in the Battle of Vittorio Veneto, which marked the end of the Austro-Hungarian Army as an effective fighting force. The offensive also triggered the disintegration of the Austro-Hungarian Empire. During the last week of October, declarations of independence were made in Budapest, Prague, and Zagreb. On 29 October, the imperial authorities asked Italy for an armistice. But the Italians continued advancing, reaching Trento, Udine, and Trieste. On 3 November, Austria-Hungary sent a flag of truce to ask for an armistice. The terms, arranged by telegraph with the Allied Authorities in Paris, were communicated to the Austrian commander and accepted. The Armistice with Austria was signed in the Villa Giusti, near Padua, on 3 November. Austria and Hungary signed separate armistices following the overthrow of the Habsburg Monarchy. Following the outbreak of the German Revolution of 1918–1919, a republic was proclaimed on 9 November. The Kaiser fled to the Netherlands.

On 11 November, at 5:00 am, an armistice with Germany was signed in a railroad carriage at Compiègne. At 11 am on 11 November 1918—"the eleventh hour of the eleventh day of the eleventh month"—a ceasefire came into effect. During the six hours between the signing of the armistice and its taking effect, opposing armies on the Western Front began to withdraw from their positions, but fighting continued along many areas of the front, as commanders wanted to capture territory before the war ended. The last British soldier to die was Pte George Edwin Ellison, at 09.30. Canadian Private George Lawrence Price was shot by a German sniper at 10:57 and died at 10:58.[156] American Henry Gunther was killed 60 seconds before the armistice came into force while charging astonished German troops who were aware the Armistice was nearly upon them.[157] The occupation of the Rhineland took place following the Armistice. The occupying armies consisted of American, Belgian, British and French forces.

In November 1918, the Allies had ample supplies of men and materiel to invade Germany. Yet at the time of the armistice, no Allied force had crossed the German frontier; the Western Front was still some 450 mi (720 km) from Berlin; and the Kaiser's armies had retreated from the battlefield in good order. These factors enabled Hindenburg and other senior German leaders to spread the story that their armies had not really been defeated. This resulted in the stab-in-the-back legend,[158][159] which attributed Germany's defeat not to its inability to continue fighting (even though up to a million soldiers were suffering from the 1918 flu pandemic and unfit to fight), but to the public's failure to respond to its "patriotic calling" and the supposed intentional sabotage of the war effort, particularly by Jews, Socialists, and Bolsheviks.

The Allies had much more potential wealth they could spend on the war. One estimate (using 1913 US dollars) is that the Allies spent $58 billion on the war and the Central Powers only $25 billion. Among the Allies, the UK spent $21 billion and the US $17 billion; among the Central Powers Germany spent $20 billion.[160]
Aftermath
Main article: Aftermath of World War I
The French military cemetery at the Douaumont ossuary, which contains the remains of more than 130,000 unknown soldiers.

No other war had changed the map of Europe so dramatically. Four empires disappeared: the German, Austro-Hungarian, Ottoman, and Russian. Numerous nations regained their former independence, and new ones created. Four dynasties, together with their ancillary aristocracies, all fell after the war: the Hohenzollerns, the Habsburgs, the Romanovs, and the Ottomans. Belgium and Serbia were badly damaged, as was France, with 1.4 million soldiers dead,[161] not counting other casualties. Germany and Russia were similarly affected.[162]
Formal end of the war

A formal state of war between the two sides persisted for another seven months, until the signing of the Treaty of Versailles with Germany on 28 June 1919. The United States Senate did not ratify the treaty despite public support for it,[163][164] and did not formally end its involvement in the war until the Knox–Porter Resolution was signed on 2 July 1921 by President Warren G. Harding.[165] For the United Kingdom and the British Empire, the state of war ceased under the provisions of the Termination of the Present War (Definition) Act 1918 with respect to:

        Germany on 10 January 1920.[166]
        Austria on 16 July 1920.[167]
        Bulgaria on 9 August 1920.[168]
        Hungary on 26 July 1921.[169]
        Turkey on 6 August 1924.[170]

After the Treaty of Versailles, treaties with Austria, Hungary, Bulgaria, and the Ottoman Empire were signed. However, the negotiation of the latter treaty with the Ottoman Empire was followed by strife (the Turkish War of Independence), and a final peace treaty between the Allied Powers and the country that would shortly become the Republic of Turkey was not signed until 24 July 1923, at Lausanne.

Some war memorials date the end of the war as being when the Versailles Treaty was signed in 1919, which was when many of the troops serving abroad finally returned to their home countries; by contrast, most commemorations of the war's end concentrate on the armistice of 11 November 1918. Legally, the formal peace treaties were not complete until the last, the Treaty of Lausanne, was signed. Under its terms, the Allied forces divested Constantinople on 23 August 1923.
Peace treaties and national boundaries

After the war, the Paris Peace Conference imposed a series of peace treaties on the Central Powers officially ending the war. The 1919 Treaty of Versailles dealt with Germany, and building on Wilson's 14th point, brought into being the League of Nations on 28 June 1919.[171][172]

The Central Powers had to acknowledge responsibility for "all the loss and damage to which the Allied and Associated Governments and their nationals have been subjected as a consequence of the war imposed upon them by" their aggression. In the Treaty of Versailles, this statement was Article 231. This article became known as War Guilt clause as the majority of Germans felt humiliated and resentful. Overall the Germans felt they had been unjustly dealt by what they called the "diktat of Versailles." Schulze says, the Treaty placed Germany, "under legal sanctions, deprived of military power, economically ruined, and politically humiliated."[173] Belgian historian Laurence Van Ypersele emphasizes the central role played by memory of the war and the Versailles Treaty in German politics in the 1920s and 1930s:

    Active denial of war guilt in Germany and German resentment at both reparations and continued Allied occupation of the Rhineland made widespread revision of the meaning and memory of the war problematic. The legend of the "stab in the back" and the wish to revise the "Versailles diktat," and the belief in an international threat aimed at the elimination of the German nation persisted at the heart of German politics. Even a man of peace such as Stresemann publicly rejected German guilt. As for the Nazis, they waved the banners of domestic treason and international conspiracy in an attempt to galvanize the German nation into a spirit of revenge. Like a Fascist Italy, Nazi Germany sought to redirect the memory of the war to the benefit of its own policies.[174]

Meanwhile, new nations liberated from German rule viewed the treaty as recognition of wrongs committed against small nations by much larger aggressive neighbors.[175] The Peace Conference required all the defeated powers to pay reparations for all the damage done to civilians. However, owing to economic difficulties and Germany being the only defeated power with an intact economy, the burden fell largely on Germany.

Austria-Hungary was partitioned into several successor states, including Austria, Hungary, Czechoslovakia, and Yugoslavia, largely but not entirely along ethnic lines. Transylvania was shifted from Hungary to Greater Romania. The details were contained in the Treaty of Saint-Germain and the Treaty of Trianon. As a result of the Treaty of Trianon, 3.3 million Hungarians came under foreign rule. Although the Hungarians made up 54% of the population of the pre-war Kingdom of Hungary, only 32% of its territory was left to Hungary. Between 1920 and 1924, 354,000 Hungarians fled former Hungarian territories attached to Romania, Czechoslovakia, and Yugoslavia.

The Russian Empire, which had withdrawn from the war in 1917 after the October Revolution, lost much of its western frontier as the newly independent nations of Estonia, Finland, Latvia, Lithuania, and Poland were carved from it. Romania took control of Bessarabia in April 1918.[176]

The Ottoman Empire disintegrated, and much of its non-Anatolian territory was awarded to various Allied powers as protectorates. The Turkish core in Anatolia was reorganised as the Republic of Turkey. The Ottoman Empire was to be partitioned by the Treaty of Sèvres of 1920. This treaty was never ratified by the Sultan and was rejected by the Turkish National Movement, leading to the victorious Turkish War of Independence and, as a result, the much less stringent 1923 Treaty of Lausanne.
National identities
Further information: Sykes–Picot Agreement

Poland reemerged as an independent country, after more than a century. The Kingdom of Serbia and its dynasty, as a "minor Entente nation" and the country with the most casualties per capita,[177][178][179] became the backbone of a new multinational state, the Kingdom of Serbs, Croats and Slovenes, later renamed Yugoslavia. Czechoslovakia, combining the Kingdom of Bohemia with parts of the Kingdom of Hungary, became a new nation. Russia became the Soviet Union and lost Finland, Estonia, Lithuania, and Latvia, which became independent countries. The Ottoman Empire was soon replaced by Turkey and several other countries in the Middle East.
Map of territorial changes in Europe after World War I (as of 1923).

In the British Empire, the war unleashed new forms of nationalism. In Australia and New Zealand the Battle of Gallipoli became known as those nations' "Baptism of Fire". It was the first major war in which the newly established countries fought, and it was one of the first times that Australian troops fought as Australians, not just subjects of the British Crown. Anzac Day, commemorating the Australian and New Zealand Army Corps, celebrates this defining moment.[180][181]

After the Battle of Vimy Ridge, where the Canadian divisions fought together for the first time as a single corps, Canadians began to refer to theirs as a nation "forged from fire".[182] Having succeeded on the same battleground where the "mother countries" had previously faltered, they were for the first time respected internationally for their own accomplishments. Canada entered the war as a Dominion of the British Empire and remained so, although it emerged with a greater measure of independence.[183][184] When Britain declared war in 1914, the dominions were automatically at war; at the conclusion, Canada, Australia, New Zealand, and South Africa were individual signatories of the Treaty of Versailles.[185]

The establishment of the modern state of Israel and the roots of the continuing Israeli–Palestinian conflict are partially found in the unstable power dynamics of the Middle East that resulted from World War I.[186] Before the end of the war, the Ottoman Empire had maintained a modest level of peace and stability throughout the Middle East.[187] With the fall of the Ottoman government, power vacuums developed and conflicting claims to land and nationhood began to emerge.[188] The political boundaries drawn by the victors of World War I were quickly imposed, sometimes after only cursory consultation with the local population. These continue to be problematic in the 21st-century struggles for national identity.[189][190] While the dissolution of the Ottoman Empire at the end of World War I was pivotal in contributing to the modern political situation of the Middle East, including the Arab-Israeli conflict,[191][192][193] the end of Ottoman rule also spawned lesser known disputes over water and other natural resources.[194]
Health effects

The war had profound consequences in the health of the troops. Of the 60 million European military personnel who were mobilised from 1914 to 1918, 8 million were killed, 7 million were permanently disabled, and 15 million were seriously injured. Germany lost 15.1% of its active male population, Austria-Hungary lost 17.1%, and France lost 10.5%.[195] In Germany civilian deaths were 474,000 higher than in peacetime, due in large part to food shortages and malnutrition that weakened resistance to disease.[196] By the end of the war, starvation caused by famine had killed approximately 100,000 people in Lebanon.[197] Between 5 and 10 million people died in the Russian famine of 1921.[198] By 1922, there were between 4.5 million and 7 million homeless children in Russia as a result of nearly a decade of devastation from World War I, the Russian Civil War, and the subsequent famine of 1920–1922.[199] Numerous anti-Soviet Russians fled the country after the Revolution; by the 1930s, the northern Chinese city of Harbin had 100,000 Russians.[200] Thousands more emigrated to France, England, and the United States.
Emergency military hospital during the Spanish flu pandemic, which killed about 675,000 people in the United States alone. Camp Funston, Kansas, 1918.

In Australia, the effects of the war on the economy were no less severe. The Australian prime minister, Billy Hughes, wrote to the British prime minister, Lloyd George, "You have assured us that you cannot get better terms. I much regret it, and hope even now that some way may be found of securing agreement for demanding reparation commensurate with the tremendous sacrifices made by the British Empire and her Allies."[201] Australia received ₤5,571,720 war reparations, but the direct cost of the war to Australia had been ₤376,993,052, and, by the mid-1930s, repatriation pensions, war gratuities, interest and sinking fund charges were ₤831,280,947.[201] Of about 416,000 Australians who served, about 60,000 were killed and another 152,000 were wounded.[202]

Diseases flourished in the chaotic wartime conditions. In 1914 alone, louse-borne epidemic typhus killed 200,000 in Serbia.[203] From 1918 to 1922, Russia had about 25 million infections and 3 million deaths from epidemic typhus.[204] In 1923, 13 million Russians contracted malaria, a sharp increase from the pre-war years.[205] In addition, a major influenza epidemic spread around the world. Overall, the 1918 flu pandemic killed at least 50 million people.[206][207]

Lobbying by Chaim Weizmann and fear that American Jews would encourage the United States to support Germany culminated in the British government's Balfour Declaration of 1917, endorsing creation of a Jewish homeland in Palestine.[208] A total of more than 1,172,000 Jewish soldiers served in the Allied and Central Power forces in World War I, including 275,000 in Austria-Hungary and 450,000 in Czarist Russia.[209]

The social disruption and widespread violence of the Russian Revolution of 1917 and the ensuing Russian Civil War sparked more than 2,000 pogroms in the former Russian Empire, mostly in the Ukraine.[210] An estimated 60,000–200,000 civilian Jews were killed in the atrocities.[211]

In the aftermath of World War I, Greece fought against Turkish nationalists led by Mustafa Kemal, a war which resulted in a massive population exchange between the two countries under the Treaty of Lausanne.[212] According to various sources,[213] several hundred thousand Pontic Greeks died during this period.[214]
Technology
See also: Technology during World War I and Weapons of World War I
Ground warfare
A Russian armoured car, 1919.

World War I began as a clash of 20th-century technology and 19th-century tactics, with the inevitably large ensuing casualties. By the end of 1917, however, the major armies, now numbering millions of men, had modernised and were making use of telephone, wireless communication,[215] armoured cars, tanks,[216] and aircraft. Infantry formations were reorganised, so that 100-man companies were no longer the main unit of manoeuvre; instead, squads of 10 or so men, under the command of a junior NCO, were favoured.

Artillery also underwent a revolution. In 1914, cannons were positioned in the front line and fired directly at their targets. By 1917, indirect fire with guns (as well as mortars and even machine guns) was commonplace, using new techniques for spotting and ranging, notably aircraft and the often overlooked field telephone. Counter-battery missions became commonplace, also, and sound detection was used to locate enemy batteries.

Germany was far ahead of the Allies in utilising heavy indirect fire. The German Army employed 150 mm (6 in) and 210 mm (8 in) howitzers in 1914, when typical French and British guns were only 75 mm (3 in) and 105 mm (4 in). The British had a 6 inch (152 mm) howitzer, but it was so heavy it had to be hauled to the field in pieces and assembled. The Germans also fielded Austrian 305 mm (12 in) and 420 mm (17 in) guns and, even at the beginning of the war, had inventories of various calibers of Minenwerfer, which were ideally suited for trench warfare.[217]

Much of the combat involved trench warfare, in which hundreds often died for each yard gained. Many of the deadliest battles in history occurred during World War I. Such battles include Ypres, the Marne, Cambrai, the Somme, Verdun, and Gallipoli. The Germans employed the Haber process of nitrogen fixation to provide their forces with a constant supply of gunpowder despite the British naval blockade.[218] Artillery was responsible for the largest number of casualties[219] and consumed vast quantities of explosives. The large number of head wounds caused by exploding shells and fragmentation forced the combatant nations to develop the modern steel helmet, led by the French, who introduced the Adrian helmet in 1915. It was quickly followed by the Brodie helmet, worn by British Imperial and US troops, and in 1916 by the distinctive German Stahlhelm, a design, with improvements, still in use today.


    Gas! GAS! Quick, boys! – An ecstasy of fumbling,
    Fitting the clumsy helmets just in time;
    But someone still was yelling out and stumbling,
    And flound'ring like a man in fire or lime ...
    Dim, through the misty panes and thick green light,
    As under a green sea, I saw him drowning.
    —Wilfred Owen, Dulce et Decorum est, 1917[220]

	
A Canadian soldier with mustard gas burns, ca. 1917–1918.

The widespread use of chemical warfare was a distinguishing feature of the conflict. Gases used included chlorine, mustard gas and phosgene. Few war casualties were caused by gas,[221] as effective countermeasures to gas attacks were quickly created, such as gas masks. The use of chemical warfare and small-scale strategic bombing were both outlawed by the Hague Conventions of 1899 and 1907, and both proved to be of limited effectiveness,[222] though they captured the public imagination.[223]

The most powerful land-based weapons were railway guns, manufactured by the Krupp works, weighing hundreds of tons apiece. These were nicknamed Big Berthas, even though the namesake was not a railway gun. Germany developed the Paris Gun, able to bombard Paris from over 100 kilometres (62 mi), though shells were relatively light at 94 kilograms (210 lb). While the Allies also had railway guns, German models severely out-ranged and out-classed them.
British Vickers machine gun, 1917.

Trenches, machine guns, air reconnaissance, barbed wire, and modern artillery with fragmentation shells helped bring the battle lines of World War I to a stalemate. The British and the French sought a solution with the creation of the tank and mechanised warfare. The British first tanks were used during the Battle of the Somme on 15 September 1916. Mechanical reliability was an issue, but the experiment proved its worth. Within a year, the British were fielding tanks by the hundreds, and they showed their potential during the Battle of Cambrai in November 1917, by breaking the Hindenburg Line, while combined arms teams captured 8,000 enemy soldiers and 100 guns. Meanwhile, the French introduced the first tanks with a rotating turret, the Renault FT, which became a decisive tool of the victory. The conflict also saw the introduction of light automatic weapons and submachine guns, such as the Lewis Gun, the Browning automatic rifle, and the Bergmann MP18.

Another new weapon, the flamethrower, was first used by the German army and later adopted by other forces. Although not of high tactical value, the flamethrower was a powerful, demoralising weapon that caused terror on the battlefield. It was a dangerous weapon to wield, as its heavy weight made operators vulnerable targets.

Trench railways evolved to supply the enormous quantities of food, water, and ammunition required to support large numbers of soldiers in areas where conventional transportation systems had been destroyed. Internal combustion engines and improved traction systems for automobiles and trucks/lorries eventually rendered trench railways obsolete.
Naval

Germany deployed U-boats (submarines) after the war began. Alternating between restricted and unrestricted submarine warfare in the Atlantic, the Kaiserliche Marine employed them to deprive the British Isles of vital supplies. The deaths of British merchant sailors and the seeming invulnerability of U-boats led to the development of depth charges (1916), hydrophones (passive sonar, 1917), blimps, hunter-killer submarines (HMS R-1, 1917), forward-throwing anti-submarine weapons, and dipping hydrophones (the latter two both abandoned in 1918).[80] To extend their operations, the Germans proposed supply submarines (1916). Most of these would be forgotten in the interwar period until World War II revived the need.
Aviation

    Main article: Aviation in World War I

RAF Sopwith Camel. In April 1917, the average life expectancy of a British pilot on the Western Front was 93 flying hours.[224]

Fixed-wing aircraft were first used militarily by the Italians in Libya on 23 October 1911 during the Italo-Turkish War for reconnaissance, soon followed by the dropping of grenades and aerial photography the next year. By 1914, their military utility was obvious. They were initially used for reconnaissance and ground attack. To shoot down enemy planes, anti-aircraft guns and fighter aircraft were developed. Strategic bombers were created, principally by the Germans and British, though the former used Zeppelins as well.[225] Towards the end of the conflict, aircraft carriers were used for the first time, with HMS Furious launching Sopwith Camels in a raid to destroy the Zeppelin hangars at Tondern in 1918.[226]

Manned observation balloons, floating high above the trenches, were used as stationary reconnaissance platforms, reporting enemy movements and directing artillery. Balloons commonly had a crew of two, equipped with parachutes,[227] so that if there was an enemy air attack the crew could parachute to safety. At the time, parachutes were too heavy to be used by pilots of aircraft (with their marginal power output), and smaller versions were not developed until the end of the war; they were also opposed by the British leadership, who feared they might promote cowardice.[228]

Recognised for their value as observation platforms, balloons were important targets for enemy aircraft. To defend them against air attack, they were heavily protected by antiaircraft guns and patrolled by friendly aircraft; to attack them, unusual weapons such as air-to-air rockets were even tried. Thus, the reconnaissance value of blimps and balloons contributed to the development of air-to-air combat between all types of aircraft, and to the trench stalemate, because it was impossible to move large numbers of troops undetected. The Germans conducted air raids on England during 1915 and 1916 with airships, hoping to damage British morale and cause aircraft to be diverted from the front lines, and indeed the resulting panic led to the diversion of several squadrons of fighters from France.[225][228]
War crimes
Baralong incidents
Main article: Baralong incidents

On 19 August 1915, the German submarine U-27 was sunk by the British Q-ship HMS Baralong. All German survivors were summarily executed by Baralong's crew on the orders of Lieutenant Godfrey Herbert, the captain of the ship. The shooting was reported to the media by American citizens who were on board the Nicosia, a British freighter loaded with war supplies, which was stopped by U-27 just minutes before the incident.[229]

On 24 September, Baralong destroyed U-41, which was in the process of sinking the cargo ship Urbino. According to Karl Goetz, the submarine's commander, Baralong continued to fly the US flag after firing on U-41 and then rammed the lifeboat – carrying the German survivors – sinking it.[230]
HMHS Llandovery Castle

The Canadian hospital ship HMHS Llandovery Castle was torpedoed by the German submarine SM U-86 on 27 June 1918 in violation of international law. Only 24 of the 258 medical personnel, patients, and crew survived. Survivors reported that the U-boat surfaced and ran down the lifeboats, machine-gunning survivors in the water. The U-boat captain, Helmut Patzig, was charged with war crimes in Germany following the war, but escaped prosecution by going to the Free City of Danzig, beyond the jurisdiction of German courts.[231]
Chemical weapons in warfare
Main article: Chemical weapons in World War I
French soldiers making a gas and flame attack on German trenches in Flanders

The use of poison gas, as a weapon, was introduced by Imperial Germany on 31 January 1915 during the Battle of Bolimov, and was later subsequently used by all major belligerents against enemy combatants throughout the war. It is estimated that the use of chemical weapons employed by both sides throughout the war had inflicted 1.3 million casualties. For example, the British had over 180,000 chemical weapon casualties during the war, and up to one-third of US casualties were caused by gas and mustard. The Russian Army reportedly suffered roughly 500,000 chemical weapon casualties in World War I.[232] The use of chemical weapons in warfare was in direct violation of the 1899 Hague Declaration Concerning Asphyxiating Gases and the 1907 Hague Convention on Land Warfare, which prohibited their use.[233][234]

Poison gas was not only limited to combatants but also civilians as civilian towns were at risk from winds blowing the poison gases through. Civilians rarely had a warning system put into place to alert their neighbors of the danger. In addition to poor warning systems, civilians often did not have access to effective gas masks. An estimated 100,000–260,000 civilian casualties were caused by chemical weapons during the conflict and tens of thousands of more (along with military personnel) died from scarring of the lungs, skin damage, and cerebral damage in the years after the conflict ended. Many commanders on both sides knew that such weapons would cause major harm to civilians as wind would blow poison gases into nearby civilian towns but nonetheless continued to use them throughout the war. British Field Marshal Sir Douglas Haig wrote in his diary: "My officers and I were aware that such weapons would cause harm to women and children living in nearby towns, as strong winds were common in the battlefront. However, because the weapon was to be directed against the enemy, none of us were overly concerned at all."[235][236][237][238]
Genocide and ethnic cleansing
Austro-Hungarian soldiers executing men and women in Serbia, 1916.[239]
Armenians killed during the Armenian Genocide. Image taken from Ambassador Morgenthau's Story, written by Henry Morgenthau, Sr. and published in 1918.[240]
Main article: Ottoman casualties of World War I
See also: Armenian Genocide, Assyrian Genocide, Greek genocide and Genocide denial

The ethnic cleansing of the Ottoman Empire's Armenian population, including mass deportations and executions, during the final years of the Ottoman Empire is considered genocide.[241] The Ottomans saw the entire Armenian population as an enemy[242] that had chosen to side with Russia at the beginning of the war.[243] In early 1915, a number of Armenians joined the Russian forces, and the Ottoman government used this as a pretext to issue the Tehcir Law (Law on Deportation). This authorized the deportation of Armenians from the Empire's eastern provinces to Syria between 1915 and 1917. The exact number of deaths is unknown, however the International Association of Genocide Scholars estimates over 1 million.[241][244] The government of Turkey has consistently rejected charges of genocide, arguing that those who died were victims of inter-ethnic fighting, famine, or disease during World War I.[245] Other ethnic groups were similarly attacked by the Ottoman Empire during this period, including Assyrians and Greeks, and some scholars consider those events to be part of the same policy of extermination.[246][247][248]
Russian Empire
Main article: Anti-Jewish pogroms in the Russian Empire
See also: Russian occupation of Eastern Galicia, 1914–1915, Volhynia and Volga Germans

Many pogroms accompanied the Russian Revolution of 1917 and the ensuing Russian Civil War. 60,000–200,000 civilian Jews were killed in the atrocities throughout the former Russian Empire (mostly within the Pale of Settlement in present-day Ukraine).[249]
Rape of Belgium
Main article: Rape of Belgium

The German invaders treated any resistance—such as sabotaging rail lines—as illegal and immoral, and shot the offenders and burned buildings in retaliation. In addition, they tended to suspect that most civilians were potential franc-tireurs (guerrillas) and, accordingly, took and sometimes killed hostages from among the civilian population. The German army executed over 6,500 French and Belgian civilians between August and November 1914, usually in near-random large-scale shootings of civilians ordered by junior German officers. The German Army destroyed 15,000–20,000 buildings—most famously the university library at Louvain—and generated a wave of refugees of over a million people. Over half the German regiments in Belgium were involved in major incidents.[250] Thousands of workers were shipped to Germany to work in factories. British propaganda dramatizing the Rape of Belgium attracted much attention in the United States, while Berlin said it was both lawful and necessary because of the threat of franc-tireurs like those in France in 1870.[251] The British and French magnified the reports and disseminated them at home and in the United States, where they played a major role in dissolving support for Germany.[252][253]
Soldiers' experiences
Main articles: List of last surviving World War I veterans by country, World War I casualties, Commonwealth War Graves Commission and American Battle Monuments Commission
The First Contingent of the Bermuda Volunteer Rifle Corps to the 1 Lincolns, training in Bermuda for the Western Front, winter 1914–1915. The two BVRC contingents suffered 75% casualties.

The British soldiers of the war were initially volunteers but increasingly were conscripted into service. Surviving veterans, returning home, often found that they could only discuss their experiences amongst themselves. Grouping together, they formed "veterans' associations" or "Legions".
Prisoners of war
Main article: World War I prisoners of war in Germany
German prisoners in a French prison camp, during the later part of the war.

About eight million men surrendered and were held in POW camps during the war. All nations pledged to follow the Hague Conventions on fair treatment of prisoners of war. POWs' rate of survival was generally much higher than that of their peers at the front.[254] Individual surrenders were uncommon; large units usually surrendered en masse. At the siege of Maubeuge about 40,000 French soldiers surrendered, at the battle of Galicia Russians took about 100,000 to 120,000 Austrian captives, at the Brusilov Offensive about 325,000 to 417,000 Germans and Austrians surrendered to Russians, at the Battle of Tannenberg 92,000 Russians surrendered. When the besieged garrison of Kaunas surrendered in 1915, some 20,000 Russians became prisoners, at the battle near Przasnysz (February–March 1915) 14,000 Germans surrendered to Russians, at the First Battle of the Marne about 12,000 Germans surrendered to the Allies. 25–31% of Russian losses (as a proportion of those captured, wounded, or killed) were to prisoner status; for Austria-Hungary 32%, for Italy 26%, for France 12%, for Germany 9%; for Britain 7%. Prisoners from the Allied armies totalled about 1.4 million (not including Russia, which lost 2.5–3.5 million men as prisoners). In some research[citation needed] it is stated that the number of Russian prisoners was 2,417,000. From the Central Powers about 3.3 million men became prisoners; most of them surrendered to Russians.[255] Germany held 2.5 million prisoners; Russia held 2.2–2.9 million; while Britain and France held about 720,000. Most were captured just before the Armistice. The United States held 48,000. The most dangerous moment was the act of surrender, when helpless soldiers were sometimes gunned down.[256][257] Once prisoners reached a camp, conditions were, in general, satisfactory (and much better than in World War II), thanks in part to the efforts of the International Red Cross and inspections by neutral nations. However, conditions were terrible in Russia: starvation was common for prisoners and civilians alike; about 15–20% of the prisoners in Russia died (in some researches it is stated that 2.5% of prisoners in Russia died),[citation needed] and in Central Powers imprisonment—8% of Russians.[258] In Germany, food was scarce, but only 5% died.[259][260][261]
Emaciated Indian Army soldier who survived the Siege of Kut.

The Ottoman Empire often treated POWs poorly.[262] Some 11,800 British Empire soldiers, most of them Indians, became prisoners after the Siege of Kut in Mesopotamia in April 1916; 4,250 died in captivity.[263] Although many were in a poor condition when captured, Ottoman officers forced them to march 1,100 kilometres (684 mi) to Anatolia. A survivor said: "We were driven along like beasts; to drop out was to die."[264] The survivors were then forced to build a railway through the Taurus Mountains.

In Russia, when the prisoners from the Czech Legion of the Austro-Hungarian army were released in 1917, they re-armed themselves and briefly became a military and diplomatic force during the Russian Civil War.

While the Allied prisoners of the Central Powers were quickly sent home at the end of active hostilities, the same treatment was not granted to Central Power prisoners of the Allies and Russia, many of whom served as forced labor, e.g., in France until 1920. They were released only after many approaches by the Red Cross to the Allied Supreme Council.[265] German prisoners were still being held in Russia as late as 1924.[266]
Military attachés and war correspondents
Main article: Military attachés and war correspondents in the First World War

Military and civilian observers from every major power closely followed the course of the war. Many were able to report on events from a perspective somewhat akin to modern "embedded" positions within the opposing land and naval forces. These military attachés and other observers prepared voluminous first-hand accounts of the war and analytical papers.
Support and opposition to the war
Support
Poster urging women to join the British war effort, published by the Young Women's Christian Association

In the Balkans, Yugoslav nationalists such as the leader Ante Trumbić in the Balkans strongly supported the war, desiring the freedom of Yugoslavs from Austria-Hungary and other foreign powers and the creation of an independent Yugoslavia.[267] The Yugoslav Committee was formed in Paris on 30 April 1915 but shortly moved its office to London; Trumbić led the Committee.[267] In April 1918, the Rome Congress of Oppressed Nationalities met, including Czechoslovak, Italian, Polish, Transylvanian, and Yugoslav representatives who urged the Allies to support national self-determination for the peoples residing within Austria-Hungary.[268]

In the Middle East, Arab nationalism soared in Ottoman territories in response to the rise of Turkish nationalism during the war, with Arab nationalist leaders advocating the creation of a pan-Arab state.[269] In 1916, the Arab Revolt began in Ottoman-controlled territories of the Middle East in an effort to achieve independence.[269]

A number of socialist parties initially supported the war when it began in August 1914.[268] But European socialists split on national lines, with the concept of class conflict held by radical socialists such as Marxists and syndicalists being overborne by their patriotic support for war.[270] Once the war began, Austrian, British, French, German, and Russian socialists followed the rising nationalist current by supporting their countries' intervention in the war.[271]

Italian nationalism was stirred by the outbreak of the war and was initially strongly supported by a variety of political factions. One of the most prominent and popular Italian nationalist supporters of the war was Gabriele d'Annunzio, who promoted Italian irredentism and helped sway the Italian public to support intervention in the war.[272] The Italian Liberal Party, under the leadership of Paolo Boselli, promoted intervention in the war on the side of the Allies and utilised the Dante Alighieri Society to promote Italian nationalism.[273] Italian socialists were divided on whether to support the war or oppose it; some were militant supporters of the war, including Benito Mussolini and Leonida Bissolati.[274] However, the Italian Socialist Party decided to oppose the war after anti-militarist protestors were killed, resulting in a general strike called Red Week.[275] The Italian Socialist Party purged itself of pro-war nationalist members, including Mussolini.[275] Mussolini, a syndicalist who supported the war on grounds of irredentist claims on Italian-populated regions of Austria-Hungary, formed the pro-interventionist Il Popolo d'Italia and the Fasci Rivoluzionario d'Azione Internazionalista ("Revolutionary Fasci for International Action") in October 1914 that later developed into the Fasci di Combattimento in 1919, the origin of fascism.[276] Mussolini's nationalism enabled him to raise funds from Ansaldo (an armaments firm) and other companies to create Il Popolo d'Italia to convince socialists and revolutionaries to support the war.[277]
Opposition
Main articles: Opposition to World War I and French Army Mutinies
Sackville Street (now O'Connell Street) after the 1916 Easter Rising in Dublin.

The trade union and socialist movements had long voiced their opposition to a war, which they argued would only mean that workers would kill other workers in the interest of capitalism. Once war was declared, however, many socialists and trade unions backed their governments. Among the exceptions were the Bolsheviks, the Socialist Party of America, and the Italian Socialist Party, and individuals such as Karl Liebknecht, Rosa Luxemburg, and their followers in Germany. There were also small anti-war groups in Britain and France.

Benedict XV, elected to the papacy less than three months into World War I, made the war and its consequences the main focus of his early pontificate. In stark contrast to his predecessor,[278] five days after his election he spoke of his determination to do what he could to bring peace. His first encyclical, Ad beatissimi Apostolorum, given 1 November 1914, was concerned with this subject. Seen as being biased in favour of the other and resented for weakening national morale, Benedict XV found his abilities and unique position as a religious emissary of peace ignored by the belligerent powers. The 1915 Treaty of London between Italy and the Triple Entente included secret provisions whereby the Allies agreed with Italy to ignore papal peace moves towards the Central Powers. Consequently, the publication of Benedict's proposed seven-point Peace Note of August 1917 was roundly ignored by all parties except Austria-Hungary.[279]
The Deserter, 1916. Anti-war cartoon depicting Jesus facing a firing squad with soldiers from five European countries.

In Britain, in 1914, the Public Schools Officers' Training Corps annual camp was held at Tidworth Pennings, near Salisbury Plain. Head of the British Army, Lord Kitchener, was to review the cadets, but the imminence of the war prevented him. General Horace Smith-Dorrien was sent instead. He surprised the two-or-three thousand cadets by declaring (in the words of Donald Christopher Smith, a Bermudian cadet who was present), "that war should be avoided at almost any cost, that war would solve nothing, that the whole of Europe and more besides would be reduced to ruin, and that the loss of life would be so large that whole populations would be decimated. In our ignorance I, and many of us, felt almost ashamed of a British General who uttered such depressing and unpatriotic sentiments, but during the next four years, those of us who survived the holocaust — probably not more than one-quarter of us — learned how right the General's prognosis was and how courageous he had been to utter it."[280] Voicing these sentiments did not hinder Smith-Dorien's career, or prevent him from doing his duty in World War I to the best of his abilities.
Execution at Verdun at the time of the mutinies in 1917.
German Revolution, Kiel, 1918.

Many countries jailed those who spoke out against the conflict. These included Eugene Debs in the United States and Bertrand Russell in Britain. In the US, the Espionage Act of 1917 and Sedition Act of 1918 made it a federal crime to oppose military recruitment or make any statements deemed "disloyal". Publications at all critical of the government were removed from circulation by postal censors,[126] and many served long prison sentences for statements of fact deemed unpatriotic.

A number of nationalists opposed intervention, particularly within states that the nationalists were hostile to. Although the vast majority of Irish people consented to participate in the war in 1914 and 1915, a minority of advanced Irish nationalists staunchly opposed taking part.[281] The war began amid the Home Rule crisis in Ireland that had resurfaced in 1912 and, by July 1914, there was a serious possibility of an outbreak of civil war in Ireland.[282] Irish nationalists and Marxists attempted to pursue Irish independence, culminating in the Easter Rising of 1916, with Germany sending 20,000 rifles to Ireland to stir unrest in Britain.[282] The UK government placed Ireland under martial law in response to the Easter Rising; although, once the immediate threat of revolution had dissipated, the authorities did try to make concessions to nationalist feeling.[283]

Other opposition came from conscientious objectors — some socialist, some religious — who refused to fight. In Britain, 16,000 people asked for conscientious objector status.[284] Some of them, most notably prominent peace activist Stephen Henry Hobhouse, refused both military and alternative service.[285] Many suffered years of prison, including solitary confinement and bread and water diets. Even after the war, in Britain many job advertisements were marked "No conscientious objectors need apply".

The Central Asian Revolt started in the summer of 1916, when the Russian Empire government ended its exemption of Muslims from military service.[286]

In 1917, a series of French Army Mutinies led to dozens of soldiers being executed and many more imprisoned.

In Milan, in May 1917, Bolshevik revolutionaries organised and engaged in rioting calling for an end to the war, and managed to close down factories and stop public transportation.[287] The Italian army was forced to enter Milan with tanks and machine guns to face Bolsheviks and anarchists, who fought violently until 23 May when the army gained control of the city. Almost 50 people (including three Italian soldiers) were killed and over 800 people arrested.[287]

In September 1917, Russian soldiers in France began questioning why they were fighting for the French at all and mutinied.[288] In Russia, opposition to the war led to soldiers also establishing their own revolutionary committees, which helped foment the October Revolution of 1917, with the call going up for "bread, land, and peace". The Bolsheviks agreed to a peace treaty with Germany, the peace of Brest-Litovsk, despite its harsh conditions.

In northern Germany, the end of October 1918 saw the beginning of the German Revolution of 1918–1919. Units of the German Navy refused to set sail for a last, large-scale operation in a war which they saw as good as lost; this initiated the uprising. The sailors' revolt which then ensued in the naval ports of Wilhelmshaven and Kiel spread across the whole country within days and led to the proclamation of a republic on 9 November 1918 and shortly thereafter to the abdication of Kaiser Wilhelm II.
Conscription
Young men registering for conscription, New York City, June 5, 1917.

The Conscription Crisis of 1917 in Canada erupted when the Conservative Prime Minister, Robert Borden, brought in compulsory military service through the Military Service Act over the objection of French-speaking Quebecers.[289] It opened a political gap between French Canadians, who believed their true loyalty should be to Canada and not to the British Empire, and members of the Anglophone majority, who saw the war as a duty to both Britain and Canada. Around 625,000 Canadians served in World War I, of which 60,000 were killed and 173,000 wounded.[290]

In Australia, a sustained pro-conscription campaign by Billy Hughes, the Prime Minister, caused a split in the Australian Labor Party, so Hughes formed the Nationalist Party of Australia in 1917 to pursue the matter. Nevertheless, the labour movement, the Catholic Church, and Irish nationalist expatriates successfully opposed Hughes' push, which was rejected in two plebiscites.

In Britain, conscription resulted in the calling up of nearly every physically fit man in Britain—six of ten million eligible. Of these, about 750,000 lost their lives and 1,700,000 were wounded. Most deaths were to young unmarried men; however, 160,000 wives lost husbands and 300,000 children lost fathers.[291]
Legacy and memory
Main article: World War I in popular culture

    ... "Strange, friend," I said, "Here is no cause to mourn."
    "None," said the other, "Save the undone years"... 
    —Wilfred Owen, Strange Meeting, 1918[220]

The first tentative efforts to comprehend the meaning and consequences of modern warfare began during the initial phases of the war, and this process continued throughout and after the end of hostilities, and still is underway a century later.
Historiography

Historian Heather Jones argues that the historiography has been reinvigorated by the cultural turn in recent years. Scholars have raised entirely new questions regarding military occupation, radicalizion of politics, race, and the male body. Furthermore, new research has revised our understanding of five major topics that historians have long debated. These are: Why did the war begin? Why did the Allies win? Were the generals to blame for the high casualty rates? How did the soldiers endure the horrors of trench warfare? To what extent did the civilian homefront accept and endorse the war effort? [292]
Memorials
A typical village war memorial to soldiers killed in World War I
Main article: World War I memorials

Memorials were erected in thousands of villages and towns. Close to battlefields, those buried in improvised burial grounds were gradually moved to formal graveyards under the care of organisations such as the Commonwealth War Graves Commission, the American Battle Monuments Commission, the German War Graves Commission, and Le Souvenir français. Many of these graveyards also have central monuments to the missing or unidentified dead, such as the Menin Gate memorial and the Thiepval Memorial to the Missing of the Somme.

On 3 May 1915, during the Second Battle of Ypres, Lieutenant Alexis Helmer was killed. At his graveside, his friend John McCrae, M.D., of Guelph, Ontario, Canada, wrote the memorable poem In Flanders Fields as a salute to those who perished in the Great War. Published in Punch on 8 December 1915, it is still recited today, especially on Remembrance Day and Memorial Day.[293][294]

Liberty Memorial in Kansas City, Missouri, is a United States memorial dedicated to all Americans who served in World War I. The site was dedicated on 1 November 1921, when the supreme Allied commanders spoke to a crowd of more than 100,000 people. It was the only time in history these leaders were together in one place—Lieutenant General Baron Jacques of Belgium; General Armando Diaz of Italy; Marshal Ferdinand Foch of France; General Pershing of the United States; and Admiral D. R. Beatty of Britain. After three years of construction, the Liberty Memorial was completed and President Calvin Coolidge delivered the dedication speech to a crowd of 150,000 people in 1926. Liberty Memorial is also home to the National World War I Museum, the only museum in the United States dedicated solely to World War I.

The UK Government has budgeted substantial resources to the commemoration of the war during the period 2014 to 2018. The lead body is the Imperial War Museum.[295] On 3 August 2014, French President Francois Hollande and German President Joachim Gauck together marked the centenary of Germany's declaration of war on France by laying the first stone of a memorial in Vieil Armand, known in German as Hartmannswillerkopf, for French and German soldiers killed in the war.[296]
Cultural memory
Left: John McCrae, author of In Flanders Fields.
Right: Siegfried Sassoon.

World War I had a lasting impact on social memory. It was seen by many in Britain as signalling the end of an era of stability stretching back to the Victorian period, and across Europe many regarded it as a watershed.[297] Historian Samuel Hynes explained:

    A generation of innocent young men, their heads full of high abstractions like Honour, Glory and England, went off to war to make the world safe for democracy. They were slaughtered in stupid battles planned by stupid generals. Those who survived were shocked, disillusioned and embittered by their war experiences, and saw that their real enemies were not the Germans, but the old men at home who had lied to them. They rejected the values of the society that had sent them to war, and in doing so separated their own generation from the past and from their cultural inheritance.[298]

This has become the most common perception of World War I, perpetuated by the art, cinema, poems, and stories published subsequently. Films such as All Quiet on the Western Front, Paths of Glory and King & Country have perpetuated the idea, while war-time films including Camrades, Poppies of Flanders, and Shoulder Arms indicate that the most contemporary views of the war were overall far more positive.[299] Likewise, the art of Paul Nash, John Nash, Christopher Nevinson, and Henry Tonks in Britain painted a negative view of the conflict in keeping with the growing perception, while popular war-time artists such as Muirhead Bone painted more serene and pleasant interpretations subsequently rejected as inaccurate.[298] Several historians like John Terraine, Niall Ferguson and Gary Sheffield have challenged these interpretations as partial and polemical views:

    These beliefs did not become widely shared because they offered the only accurate interpretation of wartime events. In every respect, the war was much more complicated than they suggest. In recent years, historians have argued persuasively against almost every popular cliché of World War I. It has been pointed out that, although the losses were devastating, their greatest impact was socially and geographically limited. The many emotions other than horror experienced by soldiers in and out of the front line, including comradeship, boredom, and even enjoyment, have been recognised. The war is not now seen as a 'fight about nothing', but as a war of ideals, a struggle between aggressive militarism and more or less liberal democracy. It has been acknowledged that British generals were often capable men facing difficult challenges, and that it was under their command that the British army played a major part in the defeat of the Germans in 1918: a great forgotten victory.[299]

Though these views have been discounted as "myths",[298][300] they are common.[299] They have dynamically changed according to contemporary influences, reflecting in the 1950s perceptions of the war as "aimless" following the contrasting Second World War and emphasising conflict within the ranks during times of class conflict in the 1960s.[299] The majority of additions to the contrary are often rejected.[299]
Social trauma
A 1919 book for veterans, from the US War Department.

The social trauma caused by unprecedented rates of casualties manifested itself in different ways, which have been the subject of subsequent historical debate.[301] Some people[who?] were revolted by nationalism and its results, and began to work towards a more internationalist world, supporting organizations such as the League of Nations. Pacifism became increasingly popular. Others had the opposite reaction, feeling that only strength and military might could be relied upon in a chaotic and inhumane world. Anti-modernist views were an outgrowth of the many changes taking place in society.

The experiences of the war led to a collective trauma shared by many from all participating countries. The optimism of la belle époque was destroyed, and those who had fought in the war were referred to as the Lost Generation.[302] For years afterwards, people mourned the dead, the missing, and the many disabled.[303] Many soldiers returned with severe trauma, suffering from shell shock (also called neurasthenia, a condition related to posttraumatic stress disorder).[304] Many more returned home with few after-effects; however, their silence about the war contributed to the conflict's growing mythological status.[301] In Britain, mass mobilisation, large casualty rates, and the collapse of the Edwardian era made a strong impression on society. Though many participants did not share in the experiences of combat or spend any significant time at the front, or had positive memories of their service, the images of suffering and trauma became the widely shared perception.[301] Such historians as Dan Todman, Paul Fussell, and Samuel Heyns have all published works since the 1990s arguing that these common perceptions of the war are factually incorrect.[301]
Discontent in Germany

The rise of Nazism and Fascism included a revival of the nationalist spirit and a rejection of many post-war changes. Similarly, the popularity of the stab-in-the-back legend (German: Dolchstoßlegende) was a testament to the psychological state of defeated Germany and was a rejection of responsibility for the conflict. This conspiracy theory of betrayal became common, and the German populace came to see themselves as victims. The widespread acceptance of the "stab-in-the-back" theory delegitimized the Weimar government and destabilized the system, opening it to extremes of right and left. A sense of disillusionment and cynicism became pronounced, with nihilism growing.

Communist and fascist movements around Europe drew strength from this theory and enjoyed a new level of popularity. These feelings were most pronounced in areas directly or harshly affected by the war. Adolf Hitler was able to gain popularity by utilising German discontent with the still controversial Treaty of Versailles.[305] World War II was in part a continuation of the power struggle never fully resolved by World War I. Furthermore, it was common for Germans in the 1930s to justify acts of aggression due to perceived injustices imposed by the victors of World War I.[306][307][308] American historian William Rubinstein wrote that:

    The 'Age of Totalitarianism' included nearly all of the infamous examples of genocide in modern history, headed by the Jewish Holocaust, but also comprising the mass murders and purges of the Communist world, other mass killings carried out by Nazi Germany and its allies, and also the Armenian genocide of 1915. All these slaughters, it is argued here, had a common origin, the collapse of the elite structure and normal modes of government of much of central, eastern and southern Europe as a result of World War I, without which surely neither Communism nor Fascism would have existed except in the minds of unknown agitators and crackpots.[309]

Economic effects
See also: Economic history of World War I
Poster showing women workers, 1915.

One of the most dramatic effects of the war was the expansion of governmental powers and responsibilities in Britain, France, the United States, and the Dominions of the British Empire. To harness all the power of their societies, governments created new ministries and powers. New taxes were levied and laws enacted, all designed to bolster the war effort; many have lasted to this day. Similarly, the war strained the abilities of some formerly large and bureaucratised governments, such as in Austria-Hungary and Germany; however, any analysis of the long-term effects were clouded by the defeat of these governments.

Gross domestic product (GDP) increased for three Allies (Britain, Italy, and US), but decreased in France and Russia, in neutral Netherlands, and in the three main Central Powers. The shrinkage in GDP in Austria, Russia, France, and the Ottoman Empire ranged between 30% to 40%. In Austria, for example, most pigs were slaughtered, so at war's end there was no meat. Tens of thousands of horses were killed during the war as well, with many perishing on the battlefield; others were killed for human consumption at a time when ordinary foodstuffs were in short supply.

In all nations, the government's share of GDP increased, surpassing 50% in both Germany and France and nearly reaching that level in Britain. To pay for purchases in the United States, Britain cashed in its extensive investments in American railroads and then began borrowing heavily on Wall Street. President Wilson was on the verge of cutting off the loans in late 1916, but allowed a great increase in US government lending to the Allies. After 1919, the US demanded repayment of these loans. The repayments were, in part, funded by German reparations which, in turn, were supported by American loans to Germany. This circular system collapsed in 1931 and the loans were never repaid. Britain still owed the United States $4.4 billion[310] of World War I debt in 1934, and this money was never repaid.[311]

Macro- and micro-economic consequences devolved from the war. Families were altered by the departure of many men. With the death or absence of the primary wage earner, women were forced into the workforce in unprecedented numbers. At the same time, industry needed to replace the lost labourers sent to war. This aided the struggle for voting rights for women.[312]
Hyperinflation reduced German banknotes' value so much that they could be used as wallpaper. Many savers were ruined.[313]

World War I further compounded the gender imbalance, adding to the phenomenon of surplus women. The deaths of nearly one million men during the war in Britain increased the gender gap by almost a million; from 670,000 to 1,700,000. The number of unmarried women seeking economic means grew dramatically. In addition, demobilisation and economic decline following the war caused high unemployment. The war increased female employment; however, the return of demoblised men displaced many from the workforce, as did the closure of many of the wartime factories. Hence women who had worked during the war found themselves struggling to find jobs and those approaching working age were not offered the opportunity.

In Britain, rationing was finally imposed in early 1918, limited to meat, sugar, and fats (butter and margarine), but not bread. The new system worked smoothly. From 1914 to 1918, trade union membership doubled, from a little over four million to a little over eight million. Work stoppages and strikes became frequent in 1917–1918 as the unions expressed grievances regarding prices, alcohol control, pay disputes, fatigue from overtime and working on Sundays, and inadequate housing.

Britain turned to her colonies for help in obtaining essential war materials whose supply had become difficult from traditional sources. Geologists such as Albert Ernest Kitson were called on to find new resources of precious minerals in the African colonies. Kitson discovered important new deposits of manganese, used in munitions production, in the Gold Coast.[314]

Article 231 of the Treaty of Versailles (the so-called "war guilt" clause) stated Germany accepted responsibility for "all the loss and damage to which the Allied and Associated Governments and their nationals have been subjected as a consequence of the war imposed upon them by the aggression of Germany and her allies."[315] It was worded as such to lay a legal basis for reparations, and the same clause was inserted, mutatis mutandis "in the treaties with Austria and Hungary, neither of whom interpreted it as declaration of war guilt."[316] In 1921, the total reparation sum was placed at 132 billion gold marks. However, "Allied experts knew that Germany could not pay" this sum. The total sum was divided into three categories, with the third being "deliberately designed to be chimerical" and its "primary function was to mislead public opinion ... into believing the "total sum was being maintained."[317] Thus, 50 billion gold marks (12.5 billion dollars) "represented the actual Allied assessment of German capacity to pay" and "therefore ... represented the total German reparations" figure that had to be paid.[317] Furthermore, this figure could be paid in cash or in kind (coal, timber, chemical dyes, etc.). In addition, some of the territory lost—via the treaty of Versailles—was credited towards the reparation figure as were other acts such as helping to restore the Library of Louvain.[318] By 1929, the Great Depression arrived, causing political chaos throughout the world.[319] In 1932 the payment of reparations was suspended by the international community, by which point Germany had only paid the equivalent of 20.598 billon gold marks in reparations.[320] With the rise of Adolf Hitler, all bonds and loans that had been issued and taken out during the 1920s and early 1930s were cancelled. David Andelman notes "refusing to pay doesn't make an agreement null and void. The bonds, the agreement, still exist." Thus, following the Second World War, at the London Conference in 1953, Germany agreed to resume payment on the money borrowed. On 3 October 2010, Germany made the final payment on these bonds.[321]
Media
File:Bombers of WW1.oggPlay media
Allied bombing runs over German lines.
	
File:Tanks of WWI.oggPlay media
French and British WWI-era tanks.
Menu
0:00
"The Makin's of the U.S.A."
performed by Harry Von Tilzer and the Peerless Quartet. By Vincent Bryan. Columbia Records, March 1918.
	
Menu
0:00
"We're All Going Calling on the Kaiser"
performed by Arthur Fields and the Peerless Quartet. By James A. Brennan. Edison Records, May 1918.
	
Menu
0:00
"Tamo Daleko", performed by a Serbian émigré ensemble named Tamburaško Pevačko Društvo.
Columbia Records, April 1917.
See also
Book icon 	

    Book: World War I

Portal icon 	World War I portal
Portal icon 	War portal

    Death rates in the 20th century
    European Civil War
    List of people associated with World War I
    Lists of wars
    List of wars and anthropogenic disasters by death toll
    Lists of World War I topics
    Timeline of World War I
    World War I casualties
    World War I medal abbreviations

Footnotes

The United States did not ratify any of the treaties agreed to at the Paris Peace Conference.
Bulgaria joined the Central Powers on 14 October 1915.
The Ottoman Empire agreed to a secret alliance with Germany on 2 August 1914. It joined the war on the side of the Central Powers on 29 October 1914.
The United States declared war on Austria-Hungary on December 7, 1917.
Austria was considered one of the successor states to Austria-Hungary.
The United States declared war on Germany on April 6, 1917.
Hungary was considered one of the successor states to Austria-Hungary.

    Although the Treaty of Sèvres was intended to end the war between the Allies and the Ottoman Empire, the Allies and the Republic of Turkey, the successor state of the Ottoman Empire, agreed to the Treaty of Lausanne.

Notes

"British Army statistics of the Great War". 1914-1918.net. Retrieved 13 December 2011.
Figures are for the British Empire
Figures are for Metropolitan France and its colonies
Tucker & Roberts 2005, p. 273
Willmott 2003, p. 307
Willmott 2003, pp. 10–11
Willmott 2003, p. 15
Keegan 1998, p. 8
Bade & Brown 2003, pp. 167–168
Taylor 1998, pp. 80–93
Djokić 2003, p. 24
Evans 2004, p. 12
Martel 2003, p. xii ff
"Were they always called World War I and World War II?". Ask History. Retrieved 24 October 2013.
Gail Braybon (2004). Evidence, History, and the Great War: Historians and the Impact of 1914–18. Berghahn Books. p. 8. ISBN 9781571818010.
"great, adj., adv., and n.". Oxford English Dictionary. Retrieved March 2012.
Shapiro & Epstein 2006, p. 329 citing a wire service report in The Indianapolis Star, 20 September 1914.
Keegan 1998, p. 52
Willmott 2003, p. 21
Prior 1999, p. 18
Fromkin 2004, p. 94
Keegan 1998, pp. 48–49
Willmott 2003, pp. 2–23
Jeffrey Finestone; Robert K. Massie (1981). The last courts of Europe. Dent. p. 247.
David James Smith (2010). One Morning In Sarajevo. Hachette UK. ISBN 9780297856085. "He was photographed on the way to the station and the photograph has been reproduced many times in books and articles, claiming to depict the arrest of Gavrilo Princip. But there is no photograph of Gavro's arrest – this photograph shows the arrest of Behr."
"European powers maintain focus despite killings in Sarajevo — History.com This Day in History — 6/30/1914". History.com. Retrieved 26 December 2013.
Willmott 2003, p. 26
Dimitrije Djordjević; Richard B. Spence (1992). Scholar, patriot, mentor: historical essays in honor of Dimitrije Djordjević. East European Monographs. p. 313. ISBN 978-0-88033-217-0. "Following the assassination of Franz Ferdinand in June 1914, Croats and Muslims in Sarajevo joined forces in an anti-Serb pogrom."
Reports Service: Southeast Europe series. American Universities Field Staff. 1964. p. 44. Retrieved 7 December 2013. "... the assassination was followed by officially encouraged anti-Serb riots in Sarajevo ..."
Daniela Gioseffi (1993). On Prejudice: A Global Perspective. Anchor Books. p. 246. ISBN 978-0-385-46938-8. Retrieved 2 September 2013. "... Andric describes the "Sarajevo frenzy of hate" that erupted among Muslims, Roman Catholics, and Orthodox believers following the assassination on June 28, 1914, of Archduke Franz Ferdinand in Sarajevo ..."
Andrej Mitrović (2007). Serbia's Great War, 1914–1918. Purdue University Press. p. 19. ISBN 978-1-55753-477-4. Retrieved 7 December 2013.
Tomasevich 2001, p. 485

    The Bosnian wartime militia (Schutzkorps), which became known for its persecution of Serbs, was overwhelmingly Muslim.

John R. Schindler (2007). Unholy Terror: Bosnia, Al-Qa'ida, and the Rise of Global Jihad. Zenith Imprint. p. 29. ISBN 978-1-61673-964-5.
Velikonja 2003, p. 141
Herbert Kröll (28 February 2008). Austrian-Greek encounters over the centuries: history, diplomacy, politics, arts, economics. Studienverlag. p. 55. ISBN 978-3-7065-4526-6. Retrieved 1 September 2013. "... arrested and interned some 5.500 prominent Serbs and sentenced to death some 460 persons, a new Schutzkorps, an auxiliary militia, widened the anti-Serb repression."
Stevenson 1996, p. 12
Willmott 2003, p. 27
Crowe, David (2001). The Essentials of European History: 1914 to 1935, World War I and Europe in Crisis. Research & Education Assoc. pp. 4–5. ISBN 978-0-7386-7106-2.
Dell, Pamela (2013). A World War I Timeline (Smithsonian War Timelines Series). Capstone. pp. 10–12. ISBN 978-1-4765-4159-4.
Willmott 2003, p. 29
"Daily Mirror Headlines: The Declaration of War, Published 4 August 1914". BBC. Retrieved 9 February 2010.
Strachan 2003, pp. 292–296, 343–354
Tucker & Roberts 2005, p. 172
John R. Schindler (1 April 2002). "Disaster on the Drina: The Austro-Hungarian Army in Serbia, 1914". Wih.sagepub.com. Retrieved 2013-03-13.
Holmes 2014, pp. 194, 211.
Tucker & Roberts 2005, pp. 376–8
DONKO, Wilhelm M.: "A Brief History of the Austrian Navy" epubli GmbH, Berlin, 2012, page 79
Keegan 1998, pp. 224–232
Falls 1960, pp. 79–80
Farwell 1989, p. 353
Brown 1994, pp. 197–198
Brown 1994, pp. 201–203
<Please add first missing authors to populate metadata.>, Participants from the Indian subcontinent in the First World War, Memorial Gates Trust, retrieved 12 December 2008
Raudzens 1990, pp. 424
Raudzens 1990, pp. 421–423
Goodspeed 1985, p. 199 (footnote)
Michael Duffy (22 August 2009). "Weapons of War: Poison Gas". Firstworldwar.com. Retrieved 5 July 2012.
Love 1996
Dupuy 1993, pp. 1042
Grant 2005, pp. 276
Lichfield, John (21 February 2006). "Verdun: myths and memories of the 'lost villages' of France". The Independent. Retrieved 23 July 2013.
Harris 2008, pp. 271
Tucker & Roberts 2005, p. 1221
Tucker & Roberts 2005, p. 854
Keegan 1998, pp. 325–326
Strachan 2003, pp. 244
Inglis 1995, pp. 2
Humphries 2007, pp. 66
Taylor 2007, pp. 39–47
Keene 2006, p. 5
Halpern 1995, p. 293
Zieger 2001, p. 50
Tucker & Roberts 2005, pp. 619–24
Sheffield, Garry, "The First Battle of the Atlantic", World Wars In Depth (BBC), retrieved 11 November 2009
Gilbert 2004, p. 306
von der Porten 1969
Jones 2001, p. 80
Nova Scotia House of Assembly Committee on Veterans' Affairs (9 November 2006), "Committee Hansard", Hansard, retrieved 12 March 2013
Roger Chickering, Stig Förster, Bernd Greiner; German Historical Institute (2005), A world at total war: global conflict and the politics of destruction, 1937–1945, Washington, D.C.: Cambridge University Press, p. 73, ISBN 0-521-83432-5
Price 1980
"The Balkan Wars and World War I". Library of Congress Country Studies.
Spencer Tucker; Priscilla Mary Roberts (1 January 2005). World War One. ABC-CLIO. pp. 241–. ISBN 978-1-85109-420-2.
Neiberg 2005, pp. 54–55
Tucker & Roberts 2005, pp. 1075–6
Neiberg 2005, pp. 108–10
Tucker, Wood & Murphy 1999, p. 120
Korsun, N. "The Balkan Front of the World War" (in Russian). militera.lib.ru. Retrieved 27 September 2010.
Doughty 2005, p. 491
Fawaz, Leila Tarazi. A Land of Aching Hearts: The Middle East in the Great War (2014)
Gettleman, [edited] by Marvin; Schaar, Stuart (2003). The Middle East and Islamic world reader (4th pr. ed.). New York: Grove press. pp. 119–120. ISBN 0802139361.
January, Brendan (2007). Genocide : modern crimes against humanity. Minneapolis, Minn.: Twenty-First Century Books. p. 14. ISBN 0761334211.
Lieberman, Benjamin (2013). The Holocaust and Genocides in Europe. New York: Continuum Publishing Corporation. pp. 80–1. ISBN 1441194789.
Fromkin 2001, p. 119
Hinterhoff 1984, pp. 499–503
a b c The Encyclopedia Americana, 1920, v.28, p.403
a b c d e f g (Northcote 1922, pp. 788)
Sachar 1970, pp. 122–138
Gilbert 1994
Hanioglu, M. Sukru (2010), A Brief History of the Late Ottoman Empire, Princeton University Press, pp. 180–181, ISBN 978-0-691-13452-9
Page
Denis Mack Smith, Modern Italy: A Political History, Univ. of Michigan Press (1997) p. 262
Giuseppe Praga, Franco Luxardo. History of Dalmatia. Giardini, 1993. Pp. 281.
Paul O'Brien. Mussolini in the First World War: the Journalist, the Soldier, the Fascist. Oxford, England, UK; New York, New York, USA: Berg, 2005. Pp. 17.
Hickey 2003, pp. 60–65
Tucker 2005, pp. 585–9
Michael B. Barrett, Prelude to Blitzkrieg: The 1916 Austro-German Campaign in Romania (2013)
"The Battle of Marasti (July 1917)". WorldWar2.ro. 22 July 1917. Retrieved 8 May 2011.
Cyril Falls, The Great War, p. 285
Béla, Köpeczi, Erdély története, Akadémiai Kiadó
Béla, Köpeczi, History of Transylvania, Akadémiai Kiadó, ISBN 84-8371-020-X
Erlikman, Vadim (2004), Poteri narodonaseleniia v XX veke : spravochnik, Moscow, ISBN 5-93165-107-1
Tucker 2005, p. 715
Meyer 2006, pp. 152–4, 161, 163, 175, 182
Smele
Schindler 2003
Wheeler-Bennett 1956
Mawdsley 2008, pp. 54–55
Kernek 1970, pp. 721–766
Stracham (1998), p. 61
Marshall, 292.
Heyman 1997, pp. 146–147
Kurlander 2006
Shanafelt 1985, pp. 125–30
Brands 1997, p. 756
Tuchman 1966
Karp 1979
"Woodrow Wilson Urges Congress to Declare War on Germany" (Wikisource)
"Selective Service System: History and Records". Sss.gov. Retrieved 27 July 2010.
Wilgus 1931, p. 52
<Please add first missing authors to populate metadata.>, Teaching With Documents: Photographs of the 369th Infantry and African Americans during World War I, US National Archives and Records Administration, retrieved 29 October 2009
Millett & Murray 1988, p. 143
Westwell 2004
Posen 1984, pp. 190&191
Gray 1991, p. 86
Moon 1996, pp. 495–196
Rickard 2007
Hovannisian 1967, pp. 1–39
Leonard P. Ayers, The war with Germany: a statistical summary (1919) p 104 url=https://archive.org/stream/warwithgermanyst00ayreuoft#page/n1/mode/1up online
Schreiber, Shane B (2004) [1977]. Shock Army of the British Empire: The Canadian Corps in the Last 100 Days of the Great War. St. Catharines, ON: Vanwell. ISBN 1-55125-096-9. OCLC 57063659.
Rickard 2001
Pitt 2003
Terraine 1963
Gray & Argyle 1990
Nicholson 1962
Ludendorff 1919
McLellan, p. 49
Christie, Norm M (1997). The Canadians at Cambrai and the Canal du Nord, August–September 1918. For King and Empire: a social history and battlefield tour. CEF Books. ISBN 1-896979-18-1. OCLC 166099767.
Stevenson 2004, p. 380
Hull 2006, pp. 307–10
Stevenson 2004, p. 383
Painter 2012, p. 25: "Over the course of the war the United States supplied more than 80 percent of Allied oil requirements, and after US entry into the war, the United States helped provide and protect tankers transporting oil to Europe. US oil resources meant that insufficient energy supplies did not hamper the Allies, as they did the Central Powers."
Stevenson 2004, p. 385
Stevenson 2004
"Clairière de l'Armistice" (in French). Ville de Compiègne. Archived from the original on 27 August 2007.
"1918 Timeline". League of Nations Photo Archive. Retrieved 20 November 2009.
Lindsay, Robert. "The Last Hours". 28th (Northwest) Battalion Headquarters. Retrieved 20 November 2009.
Hayes, John (29 October 2008). "The last soldiers to die in World War I". BBC News. Retrieved 2013-03-12.
Baker 2006
Chickering 2004, pp. 185–188
Gerd Hardach, The First World War, 1914–1918 (1977) p 153, using estimated made by H. Menderhausen, The Economics of War (1941) p 305
"France's oldest WWI veteran dies", BBC News, 20 January 2008.
Spencer Tucker (2005), Encyclopedia of World War I, ABC-CLIO, p. 273. ISBN 1-85109-420-2
Hastedt, Glenn P. (2009). Encyclopedia of American Foreign Policy. Infobase Publishing. p. 483. ISBN 143810989X.
Murrin, John; Johnson, Paul; McPherson, James; Gerstle, Gary; Fahs, Alice (2010). Liberty, Equality, Power: A History of the American People II. Cengage Learning. p. 622. ISBN 0495903833.
Staff (3 July 1921). "Harding Ends War; Signs Peace Decree at Senator's Home. Thirty Persons Witness Momentous Act in Frelinghuysen Living Room at Raritan.". The New York Times.
The London Gazette: no. 31773. p. 1671. 10 February 1920.
The London Gazette: no. 31991. pp. 7765–7766. 23 July 1920.
The Edinburgh Gazette: no. 13627. p. 1924. 27 August 1920.
The London Gazette: no. 32421. pp. 6371–6372. 12 August 1921.
The London Gazette: no. 32964. pp. 6030–6031. 12 August 1924.
Magliveras 1999, pp. 8–12
Northedge 1986, pp. 35–36
Hagen Schulze (1998). Germany: A New History. Harvard U.P. p. 204.
Laurence Van Ypersele, "Mourning and Memory, 1919 – 45," on p. 584 in John Horne, ed. (2012). A Companion to World War I. Wiley. p. 584.
The Surrogate Hegemon in Polish Postcolonial Discourse Ewa Thompson, Rice University [1]
Clark 1927
"Appeals to Americans to Pray for Serbians". The New York Times. 27 July 1918.
"Serbia Restored". The New York Times. 5 November 1918.
Simpson, Matt (22 August 2009). "The Minor Powers During World War One – Serbia". firstworldwar.com.
"'ANZAC Day' in London; King, Queen, and General Birdwood at Services in Abbey". The New York Times. 26 April 1916.
Australian War Memorial, The ANZAC Day tradition, Australian War Memorial, retrieved 2 May 2008
Canadian War Museum, Vimy Ridge, Canadian War Museum, retrieved 22 October 2008
<Please add first missing authors to populate metadata.>, The War's Impact on Canada, Canadian War Museum, retrieved 22 October 2008
<Please add first missing authors to populate metadata.> (9 May 2008), Canada's last WW1 vet gets his citizenship back, CBC News[dead link]
Documenting Democracy. Retrieved 31 March 2012
Economist 2005
Hooker 1996
Muller 2008
Kaplan 1993
Salibi 1993
Evans 2005
Israeli Foreign Ministry
Gelvin 2005
Isaac & Hosh 1992
Kitchen 2000, p. 22
N.P. Howard (1993), "The Social and Political Consequences of the Allied Food Blockade of Germany, 1918–19", German History 11 (2): 161–88 table p 166, with 271,000 excess deaths in 1918 and 71,000 in the first half of 1919 while the blockade was still in effect.
Saadi 2009
Patenaude, Bertrand M. (30 January 2007), "Food as a Weapon", Hoover Digest (Hoover Institution), archived from the original on 19 July 2008, retrieved 14 August 2014
Ball 1996, pp. 16, 211
"The Russians are coming (Russian influence in Harbin, Manchuria, China; economic relations)". The Economist (US). 14 January 1995. (via Highbeam.com)
Souter 2000, p. 354
Tucker, Spencer (2005), Encyclopedia of World War I, Santa Barbara, CA: ABC-CLIO, p. 273, ISBN 1-85109-420-2, retrieved 7 May 2010
Tschanz
Conlon
Taliaferro, William Hay (1972), Medicine and the War, p. 65, ISBN 0-8369-2629-3
Knobler 2005
Kamps, Bernd Sebastian; Reyes-Terán, Gustavo, Influenza, Influenza Report, Flying Publisher, ISBN 3-924774-51-X, retrieved 17 November 2009
"Balfour Declaration (United Kingdom 1917)", Encyclopædia Britannica
Timeline of The Jewish Agency for Israel:1917–1919, The Jewish Agency for Israel, retrieved 29 August 2013
"Pogroms". Encyclopaedia Judaica. American-Israeli Cooperative Enterprise. Retrieved 17 November 2009.
"Jewish Modern and Contemporary Periods (ca. 1700–1917)". Jewish Virtual Library. American-Israeli Cooperative Enterprise. Retrieved 17 November 2009.
"The Diaspora Welcomes the Pope", Der Spiegel Online. 28 November 2006.
R. J. Rummel, "The Holocaust in Comparative and Historical Perspective," 1998, Idea Journal of Social Issues, Vol.3 no.2
Chris Hedges (17 September 2000), "A Few Words in Greek Tell of a Homeland Lost", The New York Times
Hartcup 1988, p. 154
Hartcup 1988, pp. 82–86
Mosier 2001, pp. 42–48
Hartcup 1988
Raudzens 1990, p. 421
Wilfred Owen: poems, (Faber and Faber, 2004)
Raudzens 1990
Heller 1984
Postwar pulp novels on future "gas wars" included Reginald Glossop's 1932 novel Ghastly Dew and Neil Bell's 1931 novel The Gas War of 1940.
Eric Lawson, Jane Lawson (2002). "The First Air Campaign: August 1914– November 1918". Da Capo Press. p.123. ISBN 0-306-81213-4
Cross 1991
Cross 1991, pp. 56–57
Winter 1983
Johnson 2001
Halpern, Paul G. (1994). A Naval History of World War I. Routledge, p. 301; ISBN 1-85728-498-4
Hadley, Michael L. (1995). Count Not the Dead: The Popular Image of the German Submarine. McGill-Queen's Press – MQUP, p. 36; ISBN 0-7735-1282-9.
J D Davies (2013). Britannia's Dragon: A Naval History of Wales. History Press Limited. p. 158. ISBN 978-0-7524-9410-4.
Schneider, Barry R. (28 February 1999). Future War and Counterproliferation: US Military Responses to NBC. Praeger, p. 84; ISBN 0-275-96278-4
Telford Taylor (1 November 1993). The Anatomy of the Nuremberg Trials: A Personal Memoir. Little, Brown and Company. ISBN 0-316-83400-9. Retrieved 20 June 2013.
Thomas Graham, Damien J. Lavera (May 2003). Cornerstones of Security: Arms Control Treaties in the Nuclear Era. University of Washington Press. pp. 7–9. ISBN 0-295-98296-9. Retrieved 5 July 2013.
L. F. Haber (20 February 1986). The Poisonous Cloud: Chemical Warfare in the First World War. Clarendon Press. pp. 106–108. ISBN 0-19-858142-4.
Joel A. Vilensky (20 February 1986). Dew of Death: The Story of Lewisite, America's World War I Weapon of Mass. Indiana University Press. pp. 78–80. ISBN 0-253-34612-6.
D. Hank Ellison (24 August 2007). Handbook of Chemical and Biological Warfare Agents, Second Edition. CRC Press. pp. 567–570. ISBN 0-8493-1434-8.
Max Boot (16 August 2007). War Made New: Weapons, Warriors, and the Making of the Modern World. Gotham. pp. 245–250. ISBN 1-59240-315-8.
Honzík, Miroslav; Honzíková, Hana (1984). 1914/1918, Léta zkázy a naděje. Czech Republic: Panorama.
<Please add first missing authors to populate metadata.> (1918), "Twenty-Five", Ambassador Morgenthau's Story, BYU
International Association of Genocide Scholars (13 June 2005). "Open Letter to the Prime Minister of Turkey Recep Tayyip Erdoğan". Genocide Watch (via archive.org). Archived from the original on 6 October 2007.[dead link]
Lewy 2005, p. 57
Ferguson 2006, p. 177
"International Association Of Genocide Scholars" (PDF). Retrieved 2013-03-12.
Fromkin 1989, pp. 212–215
International Association of Genocide Scholars. "Resolution on genocides committed by the Ottoman empire" (PDF). Archived from the original on 22 April 2008.
Gaunt, David. Massacres, Resistance, Protectors: Muslim-Christian Relations in Eastern Anatolia during World War I. Piscataway, New Jersey: Gorgias Press, 2006.
Schaller, Dominik J; Zimmerer, Jürgen (2008), "Late Ottoman genocides: the dissolution of the Ottoman Empire and Young Turkish population and extermination policies – introduction", Journal of Genocide Research 10 (1): 7–14, doi:10.1080/14623520801950820.
<Please add first missing authors to populate metadata.>, "Pogroms", Encyclopaedia Judaica (Jewish Virtual Library), retrieved 17 November 2009
Horne & Kramer 2001, ch 1–2, esp. p. 76
The claim of franc-tireurs in Belgium has been rejected: Horne & Kramer 2001, ch 3–4
Horne & Kramer 2001, ch 5–8
Keegan 1998, pp. 82–83
Phillimore & Bellot 1919, pp. 4–64
Ferguson 1999, pp. 368–9
Blair 2005
Cook 2006, pp. 637&-665
"Максим Оськин – Неизвестные трагедии Первой мировой Пленные Дезертиры Беженцы – стр 24 – Читаем онлайн". Profismart.ru. Retrieved 2013-03-13.
Speed 1990
Ferguson 1999
Morton 1992
Bass 2002, p. 107
"The Mesopotamia campaign". British National Archives. Retrieved 10 March 2007.
"Prisoners of Turkey: Men of Kut Driven along like beasts". Stolen Years: Australian Prisoners of War. Australian War Memorial. Retrieved 10 December 2008.
"ICRC in WWI: overview of activities". Icrc.org. Retrieved 15 June 2010.
"GERMANY: Notes, Sep. 1, 1924". Time. 1 September 1924. Retrieved 15 June 2010.
Tucker & Roberts 2005, p. 1189
Tucker & Roberts 2005, p. 1001
Tucker & Roberts 2005, p. 117
Tucker & Roberts 2005, p. 1069
Tucker & Roberts 2005, p. 884
Tucker & Roberts 2005, p. 335
Tucker & Roberts 2005, p. 219
Tucker & Roberts 2005, p. 209
Tucker & Roberts 2005, p. 596
Tucker & Roberts 2005, p. 826
Dennis Mack Smith. 1997. Modern Italy; A Political History. Ann Arbor: The University of Michigan Press. Pp. 284.
Roger Aubert; Margit Resch (tr.), John Dolan (1981). "Chapter 37: The Outbreak of World War I". In Hubert Jedin. History of the Church. The Church in the industrial age 9. London: Burns & Oates. p. 521. ISBN 0-86012-091-0.
"Who's Who — Pope Benedict XV". firstworldwar.com. 22 August 2009.
"Merely For the Record": The Memoirs of Donald Christopher Smith 1894–1980. By Donald Christopher Smith. Edited by John William Cox, Jr. Bermuda.
Pennell, Catriona (2012). A Kingdom United: Popular Responses to the Outbreak of the First World War in Britain and Ireland. Oxford: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-959058-2.
Tucker & Roberts 2005, p. 584
O'Halpin, Eunan, The Decline of the Union: British Government in Ireland, 1892–1920, (Dublin, 1987)
Lehmann & van der Veer 1999, p. 62
Brock, Peter, These Strange Criminals: An Anthology of Prison Memoirs by Conscientious Objectors to Military Service from the Great War to the Cold War, p. 14, Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 2004, ISBN 0-8020-8707-8
"Soviet Union – Uzbeks". Country-data.com. Retrieved 2013-03-13.
Seton-Watson, Christopher. 1967. Italy from Liberalism to Fascism: 1870 to 1925. London: Methuen & Co. Ltd. Pp. 471
Cockfield 1997, pp. 171–237
"The Conscription Crisis". CBC. 2001.
"World War I". Encyclopædia Britannica. Retrieved 14 August 2014.
Havighurst 1985, p. 131
Heather Jones, "As the centenary approaches: the regeneration of First World War historiography." Historical Journal (2013) 56#3 pp: 857–878, esp. p. 858
"John McCrae". Historica.
Evans David. "John McCrae". Canadian Encyclopedia.
"Commemoration website". 1914.org. Retrieved 2014-02-28.
"French, German Presidents Mark World War I Anniversary". France News.Net. Retrieved 3 August 2014.
Mark David Sheftall (2010), Altered Memories of the Great War: Divergent Narratives of Britain, Australia, New Zealand, and Canada
Hynes, Samuel Lynn (1991), A war imagined: the First World War and English culture, Atheneum, pp. i–xii, ISBN 978-0-689-12128-9
Todman, Daniel (2005), The Great War: myth and memory, Hambledon and London, pp. 153–221, ISBN 978-1-85285-459-1
Fussell, Paul (2000), The Great War and modern memory, Oxford University Press, pp. 1–78, ISBN 978-0-19-513332-5, retrieved 18 May 2010
Todman, D. The Great War, Myth and Memory, p. xi–xv.
Roden
Wohl 1979
Tucker & Roberts 2005, pp. 108–1086
Kitchen, Martin, The Ending of World War One, and the Legacy of Peace, BBC
<Please add first missing authors to populate metadata.>, "World War II", Britannica Online Encyclopedia (Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.), archived from the original on 4 July 2008, retrieved 12 November 2009
Baker, Kevin (June 2006), "Stabbed in the Back! The past and future of a right-wing myth", Harper's Magazine, archived from the original on 15 July 2006[dead link]
Chickering 2004
Rubinstein, W. D. (2004), Genocide: a history, Pearson Education, p. 7, ISBN 0-582-50601-8
109 in this context – see Long and short scales
"What's a little debt between friends?". BBC News. 10 May 2006.
Noakes, Lucy (2006). Women in the British Army: War and the Gentle Sex, 1907–1948. Abingdon, England: Routledge. p. 48. ISBN 0-415-39056-7.
Alexander Jung (14 August 2009). "Germany in the Era of Hyperinflation". Der Spiegel. Retrieved 2013-03-13.
Green 1938, pp. CXXVI
Treaty of Versailles, article 231
Marls, The Myths of Reparations, pp. 231–2
Marks, p. 237
Marks, pp. 223–234
World War One: A Short History By Norman Stone
Marks, p. 233

    Suddath, Claire (4 October 2010). "Why Did World War I Just End?". Time. Retrieved 1 July 2013.

References

    For a comprehensive bibliography see List of books about World War I

    American Battle Monuments Commission (1938), American Armies and Battlefields in Europe: A History, Guide, and Reference Book, US Government Printing Office, OCLC 59803706
    Army Art of World War I, United States Army Center of Military History: Smithsonian Institution, National Museum of American History, 1993, OCLC 28608539
    Ayres, Leonard P, The War with Germany: A Statistical Summary Government Printing Office, 1919 full text online
    Bade, Klaus J; Brown, Allison (tr.) (2003), Migration in European History, The making of Europe, Oxford: Blackwell, ISBN 0-631-18939-4, OCLC 52695573 (translated from the German)
    Balakian, Peter (2003), The Burning Tigris: The Armenian Genocide and America's Response, New York: HarperCollins, ISBN 978-0-06-019840-4, OCLC 56822108
    Ball, Alan M (1996), And Now My Soul Is Hardened: Abandoned Children in Soviet Russia, 1918–1930, Berkeley: University of California Press, ISBN 978-0-520-20694-6, reviewed in Hegarty, Thomas J (March–June 1998). "And Now My Soul Is Hardened: Abandoned Children in Soviet Russia, 1918–1930". Canadian Slavonic Papers. (via Highbeam.com)
    Bass, Gary Jonathan (2002), Stay the Hand of Vengeance: The Politics of War Crimes Tribunals, Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University Press, pp. 424pp, ISBN 0-691-09278-8, OCLC 248021790
    Blair, Dale (2005), No Quarter: Unlawful Killing and Surrender in the Australian War Experience, 1915–1918, Charnwood, Australia: Ginninderra Press, ISBN 1-74027-291-9, OCLC 62514621
    Brands, Henry William (1997), T. R.: The Last Romantic, New York: Basic Books, ISBN 0-465-06958-4, OCLC 36954615
    Brown, Judith M. (1994), Modern India: The Origins of an Asian Democracy, Oxford and New York: Oxford University Press, ISBN 0-19-873113-2
    Chickering, Rodger (2004), Imperial Germany and the Great War, 1914–1918, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, ISBN 0-521-83908-4, OCLC 55523473
    Clark, Charles Upson (1927), Bessarabia, Russia and Roumania on the Black Sea, New York: Dodd, Mead, OCLC 150789848
    Cockfield, Jamie H (1997), With snow on their boots : The tragic odyssey of the Russian Expeditionary Force in France during World War 1, Palgrave Macmillan, ISBN 0-312-22082-0
    Conlon, Joseph M, The historical impact of epidemic typhus (PDF), Montana State University, retrieved 21 April 2009
    Cook, Tim (2006), "The politics of surrender: Canadian soldiers and the killing of prisoners in the First World War", The Journal of Military History 70 (3): 637–665, doi:10.1353/jmh.2006.0158
    Cross, Wilbur L (1991), Zeppelins of World War I, New York: Paragon Press, ISBN 978-1-55778-382-0, OCLC 22860189
    Djokić, Dejan (2003), Yugoslavism : histories of a failed idea, 1918–1992, London: Hurst, OCLC 51093251
    Doughty, Robert A. (2005), Pyrrhic victory: French strategy and operations in the Great War, Harvard University Press, ISBN 978-0-674-01880-8
    Duffy, Michael, Somme, First World War.com, ISBN 0-297-84689-2, retrieved 25 February 2007
    Dupuy, R. Ernest and Trevor N. (1993), The Harper's Encyclopedia of Military History, 4th Edition, Harper Collins Publishers, ISBN 978-0-06-270056-8
    Encyclopædia Britannica (12th ed. 1922) comprises the 11th edition plus three new volumes 30-31-32 that cover events since 1911 with thorough coverage of the war as well as every country and colony. partly online and list of article titles
        full text of vol 30 ABBE to ENGLISH HISTORY online free
        scans of each page of vol 30-31-32
    Evans, David (2004), The First World War, Teach yourself, London: Hodder Arnold, ISBN 0-340-88489-4, OCLC 224332259
    Evans, Leslie (27 May 2005), Future of Iraq, Israel-Palestine Conflict, and Central Asia Weighed at International Conference, UCLA International Institute, retrieved 30 December 2008
    Falls, Cyril Bentham (1960), The First World War, London: Longmans, ISBN 1-84342-272-7, OCLC 460327352
    Farwell, Byron (1989), The Great War in Africa, 1914–1918, W.W. Norton, ISBN 978-0-393-30564-7
    Ferguson, Niall (1999), The Pity of War, New York: Basic Books, pp. 563pp, ISBN 0-465-05711-X, OCLC 41124439
    Ferguson, Niall (2006), The War of the World: Twentieth-Century Conflict and the Descent of the West, New York: Penguin Press, ISBN 1-59420-100-5
    Fortescue, Granville Roland (28 October 1915), "London in Gloom over Gallipoli; Captain Fortescue in Book and Ashmead-Bartlett in Lecture Declare Campaign Lost", New York Times
    Fromkin, David (1989). A Peace to End All Peace: The Fall of the Ottoman Empire and the Creation of the Modern Middle East. New York: Henry Holt and Co. ISBN 0-8050-0857-8.
    Fromkin, David (2004), Europe's Last Summer: Who Started the Great War in 1914?, New York: Alfred A. Knopf, ISBN 0-375-41156-9, OCLC 53937943
    Gelvin, James L (2005), The Israel-Palestine Conflict: One Hundred Years of War, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, ISBN 0-521-85289-7, OCLC 59879560
    Grant, R.G. (2005), Battle: A Visual Journey Through 5,000 Years of Combat, DK Publishing, ISBN 978-0-7566-5578-5
    Gray, Randal; Argyle, Christopher (1990), Chronicle of the First World War, New York: Facts on File, ISBN 978-0-8160-2595-4, OCLC 19398100
    Gilbert, Martin (1994), First World War, Stoddart Publishing, ISBN 978-0-7737-2848-6
    Gilbert, Martin (2004), The First World War: A Complete History, Clearwater, Florida: Owl Books, p. 306, ISBN 0-8050-7617-4, OCLC 34792651
    Goodspeed, Donald James (1985), The German Wars 1914–1945, New York: Random House; Bonanza, ISBN 978-0-517-46790-9
    Gray, Randal (1991), Kaiserschlacht 1918: the final German offensive, Osprey, ISBN 978-1-85532-157-1
    Green, John Frederick Norman (1938), "Obituary: Albert Ernest Kitson", Geological Society Quarterly Journal (Geological Society) 94
    Halpern, Paul G (1995), A Naval History of World War I, New York: Routledge, ISBN 1-85728-498-4, OCLC 60281302
    Harris, J. P. (2008), Douglas Haig and the First World War (2009 ed.), Cambridge: CUP, ISBN 978-0-521-89802-7
    Hartcup, Guy (1988), The War of Invention; Scientific Developments, 1914–18, Brassey's Defence Publishers, ISBN 0-08-033591-8
    Havighurst, Alfred F (1985), Britain in transition: the twentieth century (4 ed.), University of Chicago Press, ISBN 978-0-226-31971-1
    Heller, Charles E (1984), Chemical warfare in World War I : the American experience, 1917–1918, Fort Leavenworth, Kansas: Combat Studies Institute, OCLC 123244486
    Heyman, Neil M (1997), World War I, Guides to historic events of the twentieth century, Westport, Connecticut: Greenwood Press, ISBN 0-313-29880-7, OCLC 36292837
    Hickey, Michael (2003), The Mediterranean Front 1914–1923, The First World War 4, New York: Routledge, pp. 60–65, ISBN 0-415-96844-5, OCLC 52375688
    Hinterhoff, Eugene (1984), Young, Peter, ed., "The Campaign in Armenia", Marshall Cavendish Illustrated Encyclopedia of World War I (New York: Marshall Cavendish) ii, ISBN 0-86307-181-3
    Hooker, Richard (1996), The Ottomans, Washington State University, archived from the original on 8 October 1999, retrieved 30 December 2008[dead link]
    Horne, John; Kramer, Alan (2001), German Atrocities, 1914: A History of Denial, Yale University Press, OCLC 47181922
    Hovannisian, Richard G. (1967), Armenia on the Road to Independence, 1918, Berkeley: University of California Press, ISBN 0-520-00574-0
    Hull, Isabel Virginia (2006), Absolute destruction: military culture and the practices of war in Imperial Germany, Cornell University Press, ISBN 978-0-8014-7293-0
    Humphries, Mark Osborne (2007), Hayes, Geoffrey; Iarocci, Andrew; Bechthold, Mike, eds., Vimy Ridge: A Canadian Reassessment, Waterloo: Wilfrid Laurier University Press, pp. 65–85, ISBN 0-88920-508-6
    Inglis, David (1995), Vimy Ridge: 1917–1992, A Canadian Myth over Seventy Five Years (PDF), Burnaby: Simon Fraser University
    Isaac, Jad; Hosh, Leonardo (7–9 May 1992), Roots of the Water Conflict in the Middle East, University of Waterloo, archived from the original on 28 September 2006[dead link]
    Jenkins, Burris A (2009), Facing the Hindenburg Line, BiblioBazaar, ISBN 978-1-110-81238-7
    Johnson, James Edgar (2001), Full Circle: The Story of Air Fighting, London: Cassell, ISBN 0-304-35860-6, OCLC 45991828
    Jones, Howard (2001), Crucible of Power: A History of US Foreign Relations Since 1897, Wilmington, Delaware: Scholarly Resources Books, ISBN 0-8420-2918-4, OCLC 46640675
    Kaplan, Robert D (February 1993), "Syria: Identity Crisis", The Atlantic, retrieved 30 December 2008
    Karp, Walter (1979), The Politics of War (1st ed.), ISBN 0-06-012265-X, OCLC 4593327, Wilson's maneuvering US into war
    Keegan, John (1998), The First World War, Hutchinson, ISBN 0-09-180178-8, general military history
    Keene, Jennifer D (2006), World War I, Daily Life Through History Series, Westport, Connecticut: Greenwood Press, p. 5, ISBN 0-313-33181-2, OCLC 70883191
    Kernek, Sterling (December 1970), "The British Government's Reactions to President Wilson's 'Peace' Note of December 1916", The Historical Journal 13 (4): 721–766, doi:10.1017/S0018246X00009481, JSTOR 2637713
    Kitchen, Martin (2000) [1980], Europe Between the Wars, New York: Longman, ISBN 0-582-41869-0, OCLC 247285240
    Knobler, Stacey L, ed. (2005), The Threat of Pandemic Influenza: Are We Ready? Workshop Summary, Washington DC: National Academies Press, ISBN 0-309-09504-2, OCLC 57422232
    Kurlander, Eric (2006), Steffen Bruendel. Volksgemeinschaft oder Volksstaat: Die "Ideen von 1914" und die Neuordnung Deutschlands im Ersten Weltkrieg (Book review), H-net, retrieved 17 November 2009
    Lehmann, Hartmut; van der Veer, Peter, eds. (1999), Nation and religion: perspectives on Europe and Asia, Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University Press, ISBN 0-691-01232-6, OCLC 39727826
    Lewy, Guenter (2005), The Armenian Massacres in Ottoman Turkey: A Disputed Genocide, Salt Lake City, Utah: University of Utah Press, ISBN 0-87480-849-9, OCLC 61262401
    Love, Dave (May 1996), "The Second Battle of Ypres, April 1915", Sabretasche 26 (4)
    Lyons, Michael J (1999), World War I: A Short History (2nd ed.), Prentice Hall, ISBN 0-13-020551-6
    Ludendorff, Erich (1919), My War Memories, 1914–1918, OCLC 60104290 also published by Harper as "Ludendorff's Own Story, August 1914 – November 1918: The Great War from the Siege of Liège to the Signing of the Armistice as Viewed from the Grand Headquarters of the German Army" OCLC 561160 (original title Meine Kriegserinnerungen, 1914–1918)
    Magliveras, Konstantinos D (1999), Exclusion from Participation in International Organisations: The Law and Practice behind Member States' Expulsion and Suspension of Membership, Martinus Nijhoff Publishers, ISBN 90-411-1239-1
    Martel, Gordon (2003), The Origins of the First World War, Pearson Longman, Harlow
    Mawdsley, Evan (2008), The Russian Civil War (Edinburgh ed.), Birlinn location, ISBN 1-84341-041-9
    McLellan, Edwin N, The United States Marine Corps in the World War
    Meyer, Gerald J (2006), A World Undone: The Story of the Great War 1914 to 1918, Random House, ISBN 978-0-553-80354-9
    Millett, Allan Reed; Murray, Williamson (1988), Military Effectiveness, Boston: Allen Unwin, ISBN 0-04-445053-2, OCLC 220072268
    Moon, John Ellis van Courtland (July 1996), "United States Chemical Warfare Policy in World War II: A Captive of Coalition Policy?", The Journal of Military History (Society for Military History) 60 (3): 495–511, doi:10.2307/2944522, JSTOR 2944522
    Morton, Desmond (1992), Silent Battle: Canadian Prisoners of War in Germany, 1914–1919, Toronto: Lester Publishing, ISBN 1-895555-17-5, OCLC 29565680
    Mosier, John (2001), "Germany and the Development of Combined Arms Tactics", Myth of the Great War: How the Germans Won the Battles and How the Americans Saved the Allies, New York: Harper Collins, ISBN 0-06-019676-9
    Muller, Jerry Z (March–April 2008), "Us and Them – The Enduring Power of Ethnic Nationalism", Foreign Affairs (Council on Foreign Relations), retrieved 30 December 2008
    Neiberg, Michael S (2005), Fighting the Great War: A Global History, Cambridge, Mass: Harvard University Press, ISBN 0-674-01696-3, OCLC 56592292
    Nicholson, Gerald WL (16 May 2007), Canadian Expeditionary Force, 1914–1919: Official History of the Canadian Army in the First World War (1st ed.), Ottawa: Queens Printer and Controller of Stationary, OCLC 2317262, archived from the original on 16 May 2007[dead link]
    Northedge, FS (1986), The League of Nations: Its Life and Times, 1920–1946, New York: Holmes & Meier, ISBN 0-7185-1316-9
    Page, Thomas Nelson, Italy and the World War, Brigham Young University, Chapter XI cites "Cf. articles signed XXX in La Revue de Deux Mondes, 1 and 15 March 1920"
    Painter, David S. (2012), "Oil and the American Century", The Journal of American History 99 (1): 24–39, doi:10.1093/jahist/jas073
    Phillimore, George Grenville; Bellot, Hugh HL (1919), "Treatment of Prisoners of War", Transactions of the Grotius Society 5: 47–64, OCLC 43267276
    Pitt, Barrie (2003), 1918: The Last Act, Barnsley: Pen and Sword, ISBN 0-85052-974-3, OCLC 56468232
    Price, Alfred (1980), Aircraft versus Submarine: the Evolution of the Anti-submarine Aircraft, 1912 to 1980, London: Jane's Publishing, ISBN 0-7106-0008-9, OCLC 10324173 Deals with technical developments, including the first dipping hydrophones
    Prior, Robin (1999), The First World War, London: Cassell, ISBN 0-304-35256-X
    Raudzens, George (October 1990), "War-Winning Weapons: The Measurement of Technological Determinism in Military History", The Journal of Military History (Society for Military History) 54 (4): 403–434, doi:10.2307/1986064, JSTOR 1986064
    Repington, Charles à Court (1920), The First World War, 1914–1918 2, London: Constable, ISBN 1-113-19764-1
    Rickard, J (5 March 2001), "Erich von Ludendorff, 1865–1937, German General", Military History Encyclopedia on the Web (HistoryOfWar.org), retrieved 6 February 2008
    Rickard, J (27 August 2007), The Ludendorff Offensives, 21 March-18 July 1918
    Roden, Mike, "The Lost Generation – myth and reality", Aftermath – when the boys came home, retrieved 6 November 2009
    Saadi, Abdul-Ilah (12 February 2009), Dreaming of Greater Syria, Al Jazeera, retrieved 14 August 2014
    Sachar, Howard Morley (1970), The emergence of the Middle East, 1914–1924, Allen Lane, ISBN 0-7139-0158-6, OCLC 153103197
    Salibi, Kamal Suleiman (1993), "How it all began – A concise history of Lebanon", A House of Many Mansions – the history of Lebanon reconsidered, I.B. Tauris, ISBN 1-85043-091-8, OCLC 224705916
    Schindler, J (2003), "Steamrollered in Galicia: The Austro-Hungarian Army and the Brusilov Offensive, 1916", War in History 10 (1): 27–59, doi:10.1191/0968344503wh260oa
    Shanafelt, Gary W (1985), The secret enemy: Austria-Hungary and the German alliance, 1914–1918, East European Monographs, ISBN 978-0-88033-080-0
    Shapiro, Fred R; Epstein, Joseph (2006), The Yale Book of Quotations, Yale University Press, ISBN 0-300-10798-6
    Souter, Gavin (2000), Lion & Kangaroo: the initiation of Australia, Melbourne: Text Publishing, OCLC 222801639
    Sisemore, James D (2003), The Russo-Japanese War, Lessons Not Learned, US Army Command and General Staff College
    Smele, Jonathan, "War and Revolution in Russia 1914–1921", World Wars in-depth (BBC), archived from the original on 9 November 2011, retrieved 12 November 2009
    Speed, Richard B, III (1990), Prisoners, Diplomats and the Great War: A Study in the Diplomacy of Captivity, New York: Greenwood Press, ISBN 0-313-26729-4, OCLC 20694547
    Stevenson, David (1996), Armaments and the Coming of War: Europe, 1904–1914, New York: Oxford University Press, ISBN 0-19-820208-3, OCLC 33079190
    Stevenson, David (2004), Cataclysm: The First World War as Political Tragedy, New York: Basic Books, pp. 560pp, ISBN 0-465-08184-3, OCLC 54001282
    Strachan, Hew (2003), The First World War: Volume I: To Arms, New York: Viking, ISBN 0-670-03295-6, OCLC 53075929
    Taylor, Alan John Percivale (1963), The First World War: An Illustrated History, Hamish Hamilton, ISBN 0-399-50260-2, OCLC 2054370
    Taylor, Alan John Percivale (1998), The First World War and its aftermath, 1914–1919, Century of Conflict, 1848–1948, London: Folio Society, OCLC 49988231
    Taylor, John M (Summer 2007), "Audacious Cruise of the Emden", The Quarterly Journal of Military History 19 (4): 38–47, doi:10.1353/jmh.2007.0331 (inactive 2015-01-01), ISSN 0899-3718
    Terraine, John (1963), Ordeal of Victory, Philadelphia: J. B. Lippincott, pp. 508pp, ISBN 0-09-068120-7, OCLC 1345833
    Tschanz, David W, Typhus fever on the Eastern front in World War I, Montana State University, retrieved 12 November 2009
    Tuchman, Barbara Wertheim (1966), The Zimmermann Telegram (2nd ed.), New York: Macmillan, ISBN 0-02-620320-0, OCLC 233392415
    Tucker, Spencer C; Roberts, Priscilla Mary (2005), Encyclopedia of World War I, Santa Barbara: ABC-Clio, ISBN 1-85109-420-2, OCLC 61247250
    Tucker, Spencer C; Wood, Laura Matysek; Murphy, Justin D (1999), The European powers in the First World War: an encyclopedia, Taylor & Francis, ISBN 978-0-8153-3351-7
    von der Porten, Edward P (1969), German Navy in World War II, New York: T. Y. Crowell, ISBN 0-213-17961-X, OCLC 164543865
    Westwell, Ian (2004), World War I Day by Day, St. Paul, Minnesota: MBI Publishing, pp. 192pp, ISBN 0-7603-1937-5, OCLC 57533366
    Wilgus, William John (1931), Transporting the A. E. F. in Western Europe, 1917–1919, New York: Columbia University Press, OCLC 1161730
    Willmott, H.P. (2003), World War I, New York: Dorling Kindersley, ISBN 0-7894-9627-5, OCLC 52541937
    Winegard, Timothy, "Here at Vimy: A Retrospective – The 90th Anniversary of the Battle of Vimy Ridge", Canadian Military Journal 8 (2)
    Winter, Denis (1983), The First of the Few: Fighter Pilots of the First World War, Penguin, ISBN 978-0-14-005256-5
    Wohl, Robert (1979), The Generation of 1914 (3 ed.), Harvard University Press, ISBN 978-0-674-34466-2
    Zieger, Robert H (2001), America's Great War: World War I and the American experience, Lanham, Maryland: Rowman & Littlefield, p. 50, ISBN 0-8476-9645-6
    "History in brief (Israel)", The Economist, 28 July 2005, retrieved 30 December 2008
    Israeli Foreign Ministry, Ottoman Rule, Jewish Virtual Library, retrieved 30 December 2008

Historiography and memory

    Baker, Kevin (June 2006), "Stabbed in the Back! The past and future of a right-wing myth", Harper's Magazine
    Deak, John. "The Great War and the Forgotten Realm: The Habsburg Monarchy and the First World War" Journal of Modern History (2014) 86#2 pp: 336–380.
    Iriye, Akira. "The Historiographic Impact of the Great War." Diplomatic History (July 2014) doi: 10.1093/dh/dhu035
    Jones, Heather. "As the centenary approaches: the regeneration of First World War historiography." Historical Journal (2013) 56#3 pp: 857–878.
    Jones, Heather. "Goodbye to all that?: Memory and meaning in the commemoration of the first world war." Juncture (2014) 20#4 pp: 287–291.
    Kramer, Alan. "Recent Historiography of the First World War – Part I," Journal of Modern European History (Feb. 2014) 12#1 pp 5–27; "Recent Historiography of the First World War (Part II)," (May 2014) 12#2 pp 155–174
    Mulligan, William. "The Trial Continues: New Directions in the Study of the Origins of the First World War." English Historical Review (2014) 129#538 pp: 639–666.
    Reynolds, David. The Long Shadow: The Legacies of the Great War in the Twentieth Century (2014) Excerpt and text search
    Sanborn, Joshua. "Russian Historiography on the Origins of the First World War Since the Fischer Controversy." Journal of Contemporary History (2013) 48#2 pp: 350–362.
    Sharp, Heather. "Representing Australia's Involvement in the First World War: Discrepancies between Public Discourses and School History Textbooks from 1916 to 1936." Journal of Educational Media, Memory, and Society (2014) 6#1 pp: 1–23.
    Trout, Stephen. "On the Battlefield of Memory: The First World War and American Remembrance, 1919–1941 (2013)
    Turan, Ömer. "Turkish Historiography of the First World War." Middle East Critique (2014) 23#2 pp: 241–257.
    Winter, Jay, ed. The Cambridge History of the First World War (2 vol. Cambridge University Press, 2014)

External links
	Wikimedia Commons has media related to World War I.
Listen to this article (3 parts) · (info)
Part 1 • Part 2 • Part 3
This audio file was created from a revision of the "World War I" article dated 2006-06-24, and does not reflect subsequent edits to the article. (Audio help)
More spoken articles
Sound-icon.svg

    The Heritage of the Great War / First World War. Graphic color photos, pictures and music
    A multimedia history of World War I
    The Heritage of the Great War, Netherlands
    European Newspapers from the start of the First World War and the end of the war
    The World War I Document Archive Wiki, Brigham Young University
    Maps of Europe covering the history of World War I at omniatlas.com
    "World War I Crossroads" current discussions by scholars
    EFG1914 – Film digitisation project on First World War
    WWI Films on the European Film Gateway
    The British Pathé WW1 Film Archive
    World War I British press photograph collection – A sampling of images distributed by the British government during the war to diplomats overseas, from the UBC Library Digital Collections

Animated maps

    An animated map "Europe plunges into war"
    An animated map of Europe at the end of the war

Library guides

    National Library of New Zealand
    State Library of New South Wales
    US Library of Congress
    Indiana University Bloomington, USA
    New York University, USA
    University of Alberta, Canada

[show]

    v
    t
    e

History of World War I by region and country
[show]

    v
    t
    e

World War I
Categories:

    World War I
    Contemporary German history
    Contemporary Italian history
    Edwardian era
    French Third Republic
    Global conflicts
    History of Austria-Hungary
    History of modern Serbia
    History of Montenegro
    History of the United States (1865–1918)
    Russo-Turkish Wars
    Wars involving Armenia
    Wars involving Australia
    Wars involving Austria
    Wars involving Belgium
    Wars involving Brazil
    Wars involving British India
    Wars involving Bulgaria
    Wars involving Canada
    Wars involving Costa Rica
    Wars involving Croatia
    Wars involving Czechoslovakia
    Wars involving France
    Wars involving Germany
    Wars involving Greece
    Wars involving Guatemala
    Wars involving Haiti
    Wars involving Hungary
    Wars involving Ireland
    Wars involving Italy
    Wars involving Japan
    Wars involving Liberia
    Wars involving Montenegro
    Wars involving New Zealand
    Wars involving Nicaragua
    Wars involving Panama
    Wars involving Portugal
    Wars involving Romania
    Wars involving Russia
    Wars involving Serbia
    Wars involving South Africa
    Wars involving Sri Lanka
    Wars involving Thailand
    Wars involving the Ottoman Empire
    Wars involving the Republic of China
    Wars involving the states and peoples of Oceania
    Wars involving the United Kingdom
    Wars involving the United States
    Wars involving Cuba
    Wars involving Honduras
    Wars involving Korea
    Wars involving Taiwan
    Wars involving Nepal
    Wars involving Malta
    Wars involving Rhodesia
    Wars involving Sudan
    Wars involving Azerbaijan
	
	Underwater Application of Quantitative PCR on an
Ocean Mooring
Christina M. Preston1*, Adeline Harris1, John P. Ryan1, Brent Roman1, Roman Marin, III1, Scott Jensen1,
Cheri Everlove1, James Birch1, John M. Dzenitis2, Douglas Pargett1, Masao Adachi3, Kendra Turk4,
Jonathon P. Zehr4, Christopher A. Scholin1
1 Monterey Bay Aquarium Research Institute, Moss Landing, California, United States of America, 2 Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, Livermore, California, United
States of America, 3 Laboratory of Aquatic Environmental Science, Kochi University, Kochi, Japan, 4 Department of Ocean Sciences and Earth and Marine Sciences,
University of California Santa Cruz, Santa Cruz, California, United States of America
Abstract
The Environmental Sample Processor (ESP) is a device that allows for the underwater, autonomous application of DNA and
protein probe array technologies as a means to remotely identify and quantify, in situ, marine microorganisms and
substances they produce. Here, we added functionality to the ESP through the development and incorporation of a module
capable of solid-phase nucleic acid extraction and quantitative PCR (qPCR). Samples collected by the instrument were
homogenized in a chaotropic buffer compatible with direct detection of ribosomal RNA (rRNA) and nucleic acid purification.
From a single sample, both an rRNA community profile and select gene abundances were ascertained. To illustrate this
functionality, we focused on bacterioplankton commonly found along the central coast of California and that are known to
vary in accordance with different oceanic conditions. DNA probe arrays targeting rRNA revealed the presence of 16S rRNA
indicative of marine crenarchaea, SAR11 and marine cyanobacteria; in parallel, qPCR was used to detect 16S rRNA genes
from the former two groups and the large subunit RuBisCo gene (rbcL) from Synecchococcus. The PCR-enabled ESP was
deployed on a coastal mooring in Monterey Bay for 28 days during the spring-summer upwelling season. The distributions
of the targeted bacterioplankon groups were as expected, with the exception of an increase in abundance of marine
crenarchaea in anomalous nitrate-rich, low-salinity waters. The unexpected co-occurrence demonstrated the utility of the
ESP in detecting novel events relative to previously described distributions of particular bacterioplankton groups. The ESP
can easily be configured to detect and enumerate genes and gene products from a wide range of organisms. This study
demonstrated for the first time that gene abundances could be assessed autonomously, underwater in near real-time and
referenced against prevailing chemical, physical and bulk biological conditions.
Citation: Preston CM, Harris A, Ryan JP, Roman B, Marin R III, et al. (2011) Underwater Application of Quantitative PCR on an Ocean Mooring. PLoS ONE 6(8):
e22522. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0022522
Editor: Zhongming Zhao, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, United States of America
Received May 3, 2011; Accepted June 22, 2011; Published August 1, 2011
Copyright:  2011 Preston et al. This is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits
unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.
Funding: This work was supported in part by grants from the David and Lucille Packard Foundation allocated by the MBARI (CAS), NSF (OCE-0314222 and EF-
0424599 to CAS) Gordon and Betty Moore Foundation (JPZ and ERG731 to CAS), NASA Astrobiology (NNG06GB34G and NNX09AB78G to CAS), and Microbial
Environmental, Genomics, Application, Modeling, Experimental, Remote sensing (MEGAMER) facility (JPZ). No additional external funding was received for this
study. This is LLNL manuscript number LLNL-JRNL-480573. The funders had no role in study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish, or
preparation of the manuscript.
Competing Interests: The authors have declared that no competing interests exist.
* E-mail: preston@mbari.org
Introduction
Modern molecular biological techniques have revolutionized
our understanding of the diversity, function and community
structure of marine microorganisms (for review see [1–3]). One of
the techniques commonly employed in this regard is quantitative
PCR (qPCR; [4]) which is used to detect and enumerate unique
nucleic acid sequences indicative of specific organisms, functional
genes and other genetic markers in samples collected from a wide
array of environments [5–9]. For the vast majority of ocean
science and resource management applications of qPCR, discrete
samples are collected and preserved in the field, then returned to a
laboratory where they are generally processed in batch mode
many hours, days, or months later to reveal targets of interest.
Rarely is qPCR applied in the field, adaptively, in support of
ocean research and monitoring. When that capability is utilized, it
is typically accomplished by setting up a temporary laboratory that
embodies the essential elements of shore-based facilities (e.g.,
onboard an oceanographic research vessel). In either case, whether
returning samples to a conventional laboratory or creating a
portable laboratory that is used at sea, limited sampling
opportunities often restrict our ability to document microbial
community dynamics and fundamental biogeochemical transformations
that microbes mediate in response to ephemeral
environmental fluctuations [10–12]. Thus, opportunities to alter
sample acquisition schemes or adapt experimental procedures
based on results of qPCR assays are limited.
These restrictions have spurred the idea of developing
‘‘ecogenomic sensors’’ – a new class of autonomous sensor that
enables the use of molecular biological techniques in an ocean
observing framework [13–15]. We define an ecogenomic sensor as
being a field deployable instrument that allows for hands-off
sample collection, processing and molecular analytical analyses.
The devices are meant to be completely autonomous and support
PLoS ONE | www.plosone.org 1 August 2011 | Volume 6 | Issue 8 | e22522
two-way communications for transmitting results of analyses as
well as for downloading instructions so that their mode of
operation can be altered remotely [16].
A number of portable and/or reusable instrument systems that
incorporate nucleic acid extraction and detection have been
designed for use with environmental samples [13,17–27].
However, most of the systems described are not suited for
deployment in aquatic environments and often require some type
of laboratory infrastructure or personnel to facilitate sample
collection and processing.
Here, in a step towards realizing the ecogenomic sensor vision,
we demonstrate for the first time the application of qPCR using
the Environmental Sample Processor (ESP, [15]) on a coastal
mooring. The instrument was used to remotely assess alterations of
the microbial community structure and functional gene abundance
in response to changing environmental conditions in
Monterey Bay, California. Previous near real-time applications
of the ESP utilized DNA and protein arrays to sense target
molecules (rRNA or an algal toxin; [28–36]). The ESP has also
shown its utility in collecting and returning samples for fluorescent
in situ hybridization studies [29,30,32,33] and transcriptomic
analyses [37].
The ESP was originally designed to concentrate particulate
matter and either preserve it for subsequent laboratory analyses or
homogenize it in preparation for molecular analytical tests that
operate with sample and reagent volumes from 200 mL to
milliliters. While this is appropriate for some detection technologies,
others, like quantitative PCR (qPCR) demand precise mL
scale fluid handling. To meet the latter need, we designed a
separate fluid handling system that can be used as a stand-alone
benchtop instrument, or be added to the ESP system for field
deployment. We refer to this system as the ‘‘microfluidic block’’, or
MFB (Figure 1a).
In this contribution, we describe the development and
application of methods that utilize a reusable solid phase nucleic
acid extraction system and 2-channel real-time PCR module that
was integrated with the MFB and ESP. The integrated system was
deployed in the ocean for one month, demonstrating for the first
time the ability to remotely track changes in microbial populations,
in situ, using qPCR. This study highlights the potential of
ecogenomic sensors and provides an example of a new way to
study microbial communities in ocean observing networks.
Materials and Methods
System Overview
The core ESP is a robotic device that allows for underwater
sample collection, DNA and protein probe array processing, and
data transmission [15,38–40]. A core ESP joined with the MFB
(then called ESP-MFB) accomplished the same tasks, with the
additional ability to perform DNA purification and qPCR.
Integrated use of the ESP-MFB (Figure 1b) began with opening
a path between the external environment (ocean) and the
collection stage to concentrate particulates. Sample collection
and processing by the core instrument occurred in reaction
chambers or ‘‘pucks’’ that were preloaded with appropriate filter
media. For bacterioplankton studies, a sample of up to 1 L was
collected onto a 25 mm diameter, 0.22 mm pore size hydrophilic
Durapore filter (GV, Millipore) as described previously [33,35].
The material retained on the filter was homogenized in 1.4 mL of
3 M guanidine thiocynate, pH 8.9 (3 M GuSCN, 50 mM Tris,
15 mM EDTA, 2% Sarkosyl and 0.2% SDS (v/v), at pH 8.9;
modified from Tyrell et al [41], Saigene Corp.) at 85uC for 8 min.
The resulting cell lysate was then filtered through a second puck
containing a 0.22 mm pore size Durapore filter and transferred to
the sample line between the processing and collection stages of the
ESP (Figure 1b, blue line). The processing stage appropriately
modified and distributed the lysate for downstream ribotype array
and/or qPCR reactions. Once modified lysates were distributed,
the collection stage of the instrument was available to initiate the
next sampling event, typically one in which material was
chemically preserved (‘‘archived’’) for analyses after the instrument
was recovered. Processing of the ribotype array as well as all
operations related to qPCR and sample archival continued in
parallel.
For bacterioplankton ribotype arrays, 0.5 mL of lysate was
combined with an equal volume of lysis diluent (50 mM Tris,
15 mM EDTA, 2% Sarkosyl and 0.2% SDS, at pH 8.9) then
delivered to the probe array for hybridization. Methods for
fabricating and developing DNA probe arrays for bacterioplankton
clades are described elsewhere [30,33,35] except that
biotynlated probes (139 ng/uL in 0.28 mg/mL strepavidin (Sigma),
497 mM NaCl, 3 mM EDTA, 100 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.4)
were printed on Optitran BAS83 (Whatman, [33]) using a noncontact
microarray printer (Piezorray, PerkinElmer, Downers
Grove, IL). Target rRNA abundances were estimated from the
average probe spot intensity (n =7–10 per DNA probe) using
standard curves generated from reverse transcribed RNA of
cloned 16S rRNA genes as described previously [35]. Raw
hybridization values are presented for the marine cyanobacteria,
as standard curves were not available for that assay at the time this
work was done.
Once array hybridization began, a separate aliquot of the
original sample lysate (250 mL) was conditioned for nucleic acid
extraction by adding 225 mL SPE diluent (555 mM sodium
acetate pH 5.2 in 70% ethanol (v/v)) in a mixing coil fitted to
the processing stage of the core ESP. The modified lysate was then
positioned into an injection loop valve (Figure 1b, orange circle);
that valve was the common junction between the ESP’s collection
and processing stages in the core instrument and the MFB.
Actuation of the injection loop valve then made modified lysate
available to the MFB and maintained separate fluidic connectivity
between collection and processing stages. At that point, the MFB
initiated a sequence of protocols for nucleic acid purification and
qPCR as described below.
Operation of the ESP-MFB was flexible. It could be configured
to concentrate particles from a range of sample volumes and then
parse a sample for both an array and qPCR analyses as outlined
above, or direct sample homogenates to just one of those assays.
The ESP-MFB can also be programmed to skip sampling and
generate a ‘‘negative lysate’’. The negative lysate was used to
ascertain the cleanliness of the entire ESP-MFB system. In
addition to the fully integrated path of seawater sampling, we
also manually introduced partially processed samples (natural
sample or control lysates) at different junctions within the system.
These different entry points (Figure 1b, asterisks) were used to test
the system and/or operate the MFB as a standalone unit. In
addition to lysates, purified DNA templates were also introduced
directly to a valve port on the MFB.
The Microfluidic Block (MFB)
The MFB acted as an interface between the sample collection
and homogenization functions provided by the core ESP and
‘‘downstream’’ operations associated with a solid phase extraction
(SPE) column and qPCR module (Figure 1c and d). The MFB was
based on concepts of sequential injection analysis [42] and zone
fluidics [43]. It was operated as either a standalone unit or joined
to the core ESP to permit fully autonomous analysis. Integration of
Application of qPCR on an Ocean Mooring
PLoS ONE | www.plosone.org 2 August 2011 | Volume 6 | Issue 8 | e22522
the MFB and core ESP was accomplished through a single fluidic
and electrical connection.
Fluidic movements on the MFB are controlled by a 1.0-mL
syringe. The syringe is connected to carrier fluid (pure water,
Sigma, St. Louis, MO) on one side and a 1.3-mL holding coil on
the other (Figure 1a and b). The holding coil acts as a staging area
to allow reagents to be accessed then delivered to another location
in the MFB without entry into the syringe itself. The syringe, in
combination with four valves, permits access to the injection loop
coil on the core ESP, sample ports, reagents, carrier fluid, cleanair,
waste containers, the solid phase extraction (SPE) column, and
qPCR module. All lines on the MFB are PFA 1/32 inch tubing
except for the line through the qPCR module that consisted of
FEP tubing (0.04 inch ID60.0625 inch OD, Medical Extrusion
Technologies, TX).
MFB Nucleic Acid Extraction. Nucleic acids were extracted
from lysate provided from the injection loop coil on the core ESP
or supplied by the user on a sample port. All fluidic movements for
nucleic acid extraction occurred at 5 mL/sec except for elution of
template which was performed at 1 mL/sec. Four-hundred mL of
lysate was pushed to waste through a custom-made silica-packed
1062 mm HPLC column with 2 mm pore size titanium frits
(Figure 1c, Orochem Technologies, Lombord, IL) held at 55uC in
a temperature-controlled insulated aluminum block. After delivery
of the lysate through the column, the line that delivered the lysate
was rinsed with water and then cleared with clean air. The column
was then rinsed with 0.330 mL column wash buffer (100 mM
NaCl, 10 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.8, 2 mM EDTA pH 8.0, in 70%
(v/v) ethanol) followed by 1.45 mL of air. Nucleic acids were
eluted from the column with 60 mL of water (Sigma) into a
serpentine mixing coil (Global FIA, Fox Island, WA) to obtain a
well-mixed extract. To aid in column decontamination, 0.1 mL of
20% bleach (Clorox, Oakland, CA) was positioned across the
column, incubated at 95uC for 2 min, and remained in the column
until full decontamination of the MFB had begun. Extracted
nucleic acids held in the serpentine mixing coil were then primed
to the valve connected to the 1.3-mL holding coil and could either
be recovered for bench analysis, used for qPCR reactions on the
MFB, or both.
To test the efficiency of nucleic acid extraction by the MFB, we
compared MFB nucleic acid extractions originating from DNAspiked
lysates and natural samples with those using a modified
DNeasy protocol (Qiagen, Valencia, CA). For the spiked DNA
lysate tests, a known concentration of calf thymus DNA (Sigma)
was added to the lysis buffer then modified with SPEdiluent in the
ratio described above. A portion of the lysate was loaded onto one
of the sample ports on the MFB and a second equal portion
extracted using a DNeasy column (see below). Nucleic acid
Figure 1. Photos of a standalone microfludic block (MFB, A), schematic representation of its incorporation into the ESP (B), and
specific MFB components (C–E). A single fluidic connection linked the MFB and ESP (B, orange line) and permitted access to samples collected
and partially processed by the ESP. The ESP sampled the environment via an intake valve and concentrated particulates in a collection puck
containing a filter of the appropriate size (B-1). Cells were lysed in a chaotropic buffer and the lysate was positioned in a line (blue) between where
the sample was collected and processed (B-2). Here, the lysate could proceed down two different paths. The processing syringe first delivered lysate
to and began processing the DNA probe array for imaging. It then modified a second lyaste aliquot and positioned it in a port (orange) that is
accessible to the MFB (B-3). The lysate then entered the MFB for nucleic acid extraction followed by serial qPCR. Additional ports of entry were
available to the user on the ESP and MFB for loading user processed samples or standards (asterisks). Data from qPCR reactions, array images, and
contextual data stored on the ESP were sent to a shore-side station via a surface radio buoy (B-4) hourly. The solid phase extraction column (C), qPCR
module (D), and PCR reagent coils (E) are pictured.
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0022522.g001
Application of qPCR on an Ocean Mooring
PLoS ONE | www.plosone.org 3 August 2011 | Volume 6 | Issue 8 | e22522
extraction on the MFB proceeded as described. At the end of the
procedure, the eluted DNA was then recovered in total or in 10 ul
aliquots from the sample port. Natural samples were processed
similarly, but were lysed in 1.4 mL of lysis buffer at 85uC for
10 minutes, filtered through a 0.2 mm syringe filter (Millipore),
then modified as above. The eluted nucleic acids recovered from
the MFB were compared to the bench extracted material
spectrophotmetrically (Nanodrop, Wilmington, DE) and/or by
qPCR using an ABI7700 (Applied Biosystems, Carlsbad, CA).
DNA extraction using a modified DNeasy protocol occurred as
follows. An equal portion of the modified lysate (0.4 mL) extracted
on the MFB, was passed through a DNeasy column. The DNeasy
column was then rinsed and dried according to the manufacture’s
suggested protocol (Qiagen). Nucleic acids were eluted in 60 mL
with AE buffer.
Between sample extractions on the MFB, lines for SPE were
decontaminated. First, the residual template was pushed to waste.
The path for SPE was then flushed with 20% bleach, rinsed with
water, and the water displaced with clean air. The order of
decontamination was as follows: bleach was pushed into the
serpentine mixing coil, then the sample port and injection loop
flushed, and lastly the path across the column in both directions.
Finally, bleach was removed from the serpentine mixing coil,
rinsed with water and left dry.
MFB PCR Module. The custom made, two-channel PCR
module developed at the Lawrence Livermore National
Laboratory (Figure 1d) is a small, low-power, flow-through
device that accommodates user-defined temperature cycling
parameters and optical integration time for reading reporter dye
emissions [18,22,27]. The LED light sources and detectors were
compatible with assays utilizing FAM, SYBR green, TAMARA,
and NED or other dyes with similar excitation/emission spectra.
Assays utilizing SYBR green can be further analyzed by
dissociation curve profile; this functionality was not employed for
the present study.
The valve arrangement holding the qPCR reagents permitted
sequential mixing and thermocycling of up to 6 qPCR assays per
template purified using the MFB’s SPE system. Reagents for
qPCR assays consisted of two separately stored reagents: an
enzyme mix containing MgCl2 if necessary and the primers with
the 59 nuclease probe.
The MFB automatically performs all steps required to mix and
thermally cycle a qPCR reaction. qPCR reactions (30 mL final
volume) were assembled by combining 18 mL of enzyme mix with
6 mL of primer/probe solution, and isolating that mixture between
two, 6 mL bubbles of air. This mixture was positioned mid-way
across a valve port where 6 mL of sample template was added.
Selection of the template was varied depending on requirements:
water for a no template control (NTC), eluates from the SPE
column (natural samples or ‘‘negative lysate’’), or user-primed
DNA standards (positive controls). The complete reaction mixture
was then positioned within the PCR module where it was isolated
fluidically and thermocycled with the desired conditions (see
below). All fluidic moves for assembling and positioning a PCR
reaction were performed at 1 mL/sec.
At the completion of each PCR reaction, the lines for qPCR
were decontaminated with 20% bleach then rinsed with water
[22]. To aid in elimination of amplicons in the PCR tubing, the
line within the module was held at 95uC for 10 minutes with 20%
bleach then rinsed with water. A 45-cycle qPCR reaction followed
by decontamination took 2 hours to complete and consumed 14.2
Wh.
Resulting data was plotted as the change in fluorescence of the
reaction (raw fluorescence of each cycle minus the background
fluorescence) versus cycle number [4]. Background fluorescence of
the reaction was determined during the early stages of PCR,
before target amplification was detectable by the instrument. An
appropriate cycle threshold (Ct) was determined using reactions
from the NTC and positive control plasmids. Once an appropriate
cycle threshold (Ct) was determined for a given assay, it was held
constant for an entire reagent load.
In order to derive semi-quantitative information on gene
abundances in natural samples, standard curves for each qPCR
assay were run serially from highest to lowest dilution in duplicate
or triplicate. Standards for each assay were made from serial
dilutions of linearized plasmids (102–105 target copies) in nuclease
free water. For use on the MFB, an excess volume of the standard
dilution was primed to the sample port and multiple reactions in
series were run for a single dilution. After a standard dilution series
was completed and before running the next dilution, the sample
port delivering the template was decontaminated with 20% bleach
and rinsed with pure water.
To test sources of sample carryover in the system, reproducibility,
and effectiveness of the decontamination, a series of tests
involving manually made lysates from replicate field samples,
NTCs and negative lysates were processed in series. The extracts
were analyzed by the qPCR module on the MFB using the SAR11
16S rRNA gene assay. A series of five qPCR reactions were run on
each field-collected sample. Between replicate field samples, one
NTC reaction and one reaction from a negative lysate were
performed. Results obtained using the MFB were compared to the
same sample lysates extracted using the modified DNeasy protocol
and analyzed using the ABI7700.
If a lysate was provided to the core MFB by the ESP, then the
entire fluid path in the ESP from the sample intake to the
processing syringe was cleaned with 20% bleach and rinsed with
flush (0.5% Tween20 (v/v), Sigma). Afterwards, the intake line was
filled with 0.2% hypochlorite (v/v, Sigma) until the next sample
event when it was displaced with flush. Upon completing the last
qPCR reaction for a given sample, the path for solid phase
extraction was decontaminated followed by that for qPCR as
described above. At that point, a new ESP-MFB sampling event
involving qPCR analysis could be initiated.
Reagents
The ESP-MFB carried all the reagents necessary to fully process
a sample. Spent reagents were collected into internal waste
containers. All reagents except those for qPCR were sterilely
transferred or 0.2 mm filtered (Sterevix GV, Millipore) into
Flexboy bags (Sartorius-Stedim, Bohemia, NY). All reagents were
primed directly to the appropriate reagent valve port, except for
those on the MFB that contained bleach or ethanol. For the latter,
a 10 mL air bubble was positioned between the reagent and valve
port between use of those fluids to minimize their interaction with
samples as the valve rotor moved.
Real-time qPCR assays included a commercially available
internal positive control (IPC, Applied Biosystems) to verify
instrument functionality and reagent stability, as well as the16S
rRNA genes of SAR11 [6] and marine crenarchaea [5], and the
large subunit gene of ribulose-1, 5 bisphosphate carboxylase
oxygenase (RuBisCO, rbcL) from abundant Synechococcus clades in
Monterey Bay [44]. Primers and probe sequences and concentrations
in reactions for genes found in the environment are presented
in Table 1. Reaction conditions for 59 nuclease analysis were as
follows: all reactions (30 mL total) contained 16 AccuPrime
Supermix I (Life Technologies) with the addition of 2.5 mM
MgCl2. The IPC assay contained 0.56of a custom NED/MGBlabeled
primers-probe solution and 2.56 template (TaqMan
Application of qPCR on an Ocean Mooring
PLoS ONE | www.plosone.org 4 August 2011 | Volume 6 | Issue 8 | e22522
Exogenous Internal Positive Control, Part No. 4308323). Hydrolysis
probes for environmental targets were labeled with FAM/
BHQ-1. The thermocycling profile on the MFB’s PCR module for
all assays was 90uC for 75 seconds, followed by 42 cycles of 59uC
for 30 seconds with diode reading, 72uC for 15 seconds, and 90uC
for 15 seconds. Laboratory reactions were performed as described
above, but thermocycled in ABI7700 (Applied Biosystems) with an
initial denaturation at 95uC for 75 seconds, followed by 40 cycles
of 95uC for 15 seconds followed by 59uC for 60 seconds.
On the MFB, the enzyme and primers-probe solutions were
contained in separate bleach-cleaned, coiled tubing with Microclave
connectors (ICU Medical Inc., San Clemente, CA,
Figure 1e). One end of the coil was opened to the atmosphere
through a 0.2 mm Stervix filter (Millipore). Each reagent coil
contained between 30 to160 reactions depending on the mission
and included enough reagents to generate standard curves and
accomplish a sequence of runs while deployed. Once loaded, all
reagents were maintained in the dark (wrapped in foil) and held at
ambient temperature (9–25uC).
Sample Collection
Surface seawater samples used to test the system were collected
from the Monterey Bay (Monterey Commercial Wharf and
Station M0) by bucket. Seawater (0.5 to 1 L) was either processed
by the ESP or vacuum filtered at ,10 psi onto 0.22 mm GV filters
(Millipore, Bedford, MA). Manually collected filters were either
used immediately or flash frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored in
liquid nitrogen or at 280uC until use.
Field Testing
The ESP was deployed under permit number MBNMS-2005-
010-A2 in Monterey Bay, CA at Station M0 (36.83N, 121.90W,
Figure 2) from May 14 to June 11, 2009, on a mooring that
maintains the instrument subsurface [45]. The ESP was deployed
with additional environmental sensors including a Seabird SBE
16+CTD (Bellevue, WA) with fluorometer (Turner Cyclops-7) and
transmissometer (WetLABS Cstar), and an In Situ Ultraviolet
Spectrophotmeter (ISUS: [46]) for nitrate determinations. Measurements
were taken every 12 minutes. In addition to environmental
sensors on the ESP mooring, a Dorado class autonomous
underwater vehicle (AUV; [47]) was tasked with surveying a
volume of water surrounding the ESP in order to resolve the
nature of water mass changes at the mooring. During June 1–4,
the AUV repeatedly (15 times) mapped a volume ,2 km62 kmin
horizontal extent over the upper 25 meters. Wind direction and
speed at the M2 mooring (36.70 N, 122.39 W; Figure 2) was used
to characterize the regional wind forcing that influences water
mass changes in the bay (e.g. see [36]).
Table 1. Primers, 59 nuclease probes, and characteristics of the qPCR assays run on the MFB.
SAR11 16S rRNA gene Marine crenarchaeal 16S rRNA gene Synechococcus rbcL
qPCR
primers and
probes‘
Forward Primer SAR11-433f CTCTTTCGTCGGGGAAGAAA
(500 nM)
ARCHG1-334F AGATGGGTACTGAGACACGGAC
(1000 nM)
RbcLf
CAGACCACCCTCGGCTACAT (333 nM)
Reverse Primer SAR11-588R CCACCTACGWGCTCTTAAGC
(1500 nM)
ARCHG1-554R CTGTAGGCCCAATAATCATCCT
(500 nM)
RbcLr
CCCAGTCCTGATCGAAGAAGTT (333 nM)
59 Nuclease Probe TM519bR TTACCGCGGCTGCTGGCAC
(200 nM)
TM519aR
TTACCGCGGCGGCTGGCAC (400 nM)
TMrbcL
TTCGTTCCTGAAGATCGCAGCCG (200 nM)
Assay Reference [6] [5] [44]
MFB D fluorescence* 1000 1400 500
NTC No Amplification No Amplification No Amplification
Slope 23.8646 23.5654 23.1259
Intercept 40.269 41.495 41.862
R2 0.9949 0.9872 0.9473
PCR efficiency 0.81 0.91 1.09
ABI7700 PCR efficiency 0.97 0.98 0.97
‘final concentration in 30 mL reaction.
*at the end of a qPCR reaction run with the 104 standard dilution.
PCR efficiency = 10(21/slope)21.
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0022522.t001
Figure 2. MODIS image from June 6, 2009 showing the
locations of Station M0 in Monterey Bay, CA where the ESP
was deployed and Station M2.
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0022522.g002
Application of qPCR on an Ocean Mooring
PLoS ONE | www.plosone.org 5 August 2011 | Volume 6 | Issue 8 | e22522
The ESP collected samples throughout the deployment for in
situ near real-time analysis as well as to archive material for
metatranscriptomic analyses; results associated with the latter are
presented elsewhere [37]. Real-time analyses of each sample
included a ribotype array and a sequence of qPCR assays run
serially in the following order: the IPC, the 16S rRNA gene from
SAR11, the 16S rRNA gene from group 1 marine crenarchaea,
and the large subunit ruBisCO (rbcL) from Synechococcus (Table 1).
Prior to deployment, reagents for 80 reactions per assay were
loaded on the MFB.
During field operations, the ESP collected and processed 22
field samples using both ribotype arrays and qPCR as described
above. In addition, two negative control runs (negative lysate) were
interspersed among the native samples to assess system-wide
contamination. NTCs were run following the negative lysate to
specifically assess PCR reagent and module contamination. Array
images, results of qPCR runs, a log of instrument operations and
data from the CTD and ISUS were transmitted to shore hourly by
radio modem.
Results
Modification of the ESP to accommodate qPCR required
development of a fluid handling system (the micro-fluidic block;
MFB), a reusable solid phase extraction (SPE) column for DNA
purification, and a flow-thru, real-time PCR module (Figure 1).
Initially, nucleic acid extraction and qPCR on the MFB was
demonstrated in a standalone mode and then the MFB was
attached to the ESP to provide an integrated, fully autonomous
system capable of live sample acquisition to reporting of results
while deployed below the ocean surface.
Nucleic acid extraction by the MFB
In general, the extraction efficiency of the SPE column was
similar to or better than that of the DNeasy column regardless of
what port was used to introduce the sample to the MFB (Figure 1b,
asterisks), albeit with a wider variance depending on the particular
SPE column used (n= 10; 88–160% of DNeasy). We also found
that with repeated use, nucleic acid recovery from a single column
using the protocol described here decreased approximately 25%
after 30 extractions (approximately the same number of samples
that would be collected during a 1 month ESP deployment).
Of the 60 mL of water used to elute DNA from the SPE column,
approximately 55 mL was recovered. After priming to a valve prior
to assembling PCR reactions, this volume was sufficient to provide
6 ul of template to six PCR reactions from any one of a number of
enzyme mix and primer/probe combinations. To test the
uniformity of the eluted DNA, five10 mL aliquots from a single
extraction were recovered and examined spectroscopically; the
DNA concentration of those samples varied by 4.5%.
MFB extraction methods had no effect on PCR amplification
(ABI 7700) using natural samples. A comparison of four 10 mL
aliquots of a nucleic acid extract recovered from the MFB and the
single eluate from the DNeasy column produced similarly shaped
curves (data not shown) and the Ct’s observed were 20.260.2
(n =4) and 19.8, respectively. Thus, although the efficiency of the
SPE column declined with repeated use, the extract produced was
well mixed and comparable to those produced using conventional
methods.
qPCR Assays
Comparisons of qPCR reactions built and thermocycled using
the qPCR module on the MFB versus those made manually and
analyzed using the ABI7700 revealed a consistent Ct shift between
the MFB and commercial machine, regardless of template source.
The shift was characteristic of the particular PCR module used
and not a result of the MFB extraction procedure or poor reagent
mixing (data not shown). Despite this difference, the PCR module
was internally consistent when analyzing replicate templates (e.g.
Figures 3 and 4) and provided similar estimates of target gene
abundance based on relevant standard curves.
Standard curves for each assay were derived from replicate
analyses of 102–105 copies per reaction (Figure 3, Table 1).
Amplification below the 102 standard was considered detectable,
but unreliable, and therefore unquantifiable. Above 106 copies per
reaction there was a risk of contaminating the MFB with template
that can only be eliminated by extensive cleaning protocols.
Reaction efficiencies observed using the MFB were within an
acceptable range (ABI publication note 136AP01-01) except for
the SAR11 assay that was slightly below what was desired
(Table 1). Since the primary objective of this study was to prove
overall feasibility of using qPCR on a coastal mooring, no further
attempt was made to optimize PCR conditions for use on the
MFB.
In addition to standard curves, homogenates from field samples
were prepared manually and delivered to the MFB for SPE and
qPCR. Based on similarity of the amplification curves and Cts
(e.g., Figure 4a), nucleic acids extracted by the MFB and made
available for subsequent qPCR reactions were stable for at least
10 hours. By running a NTC with elution water as template we
assessed sample-to-sample carry-over/contamination within the
valves and tubing associated with operations related to assembling
and thermocycling a PCR reaction (Figure 4b, squares). The
absence of amplification indicated that the target previously found
to be abundant in the field sample did not remain in the PCR
system. Next, a negative lysate was processed and analyzed by the
MFB (Figure 4b, circles) to determine the effectiveness of cleaning
the entire SPE system. Again, no amplification was detected
indicating that the system-wide cleaning procedure was sufficient
for eliminating a relatively abundant target in a natural sample.
The above process was repeated an additional two times with
replicate field samples with the same results, proving the
effectiveness of the decontamination process and reproducibility
of qPCR within and between replicate extractions of a field sample
(average Ct 24.260.5, n= 3 samples, 12 qPCR reactions [Figure 4,
a and c]). Subsequent testing revealed that the column
decontamination protocol only effectively reduces the Ct by 10–
12 cycles. While SPE column decontamination was thus not 100%
effective, less than 1% of the total copies of target from a previous
sample remained in the column prior to processing the next
sample. Consequently, for the purposes of this concept validation
study, we interpreted qPCR data to indicate relative changes in
abundances of the target groups over time rather than an absolute
measure of gene abundances.
The IPC was used to monitor qPCR reagent stability and
sample inhibition. The IPC run included the extracted template at
the same concentration as that used for other assays as well as its
target pre-mixed into the primer-probe reagent. In this study, the
IPC reaction was run independent of and immediately prior to
other assays targeting specific environmental genes. When run
with elution water only (NTC), the IPC generated an average Ct
of 34.460.9 (n =27). The IPC from 59 of 64 seawater samples
(biomass equivalent of #150 mL seawater was passed through the
column) was within 1 standard deviation of the NTC. The
remaining five runs either showed an increase in the Ct (n= 3) or
failed to amplify (n =2). Based on this experience, we limited
sample volume applied to the SPE column to no more than the
equivalent of material extracted from 150 mL of native water. The
Application of qPCR on an Ocean Mooring
PLoS ONE | www.plosone.org 6 August 2011 | Volume 6 | Issue 8 | e22522
IPC was found to be very useful for ensuring the system was
working (e.g., via NTC), and did on occasion reveal gross sample
inhibition during laboratory trials, but it nevertheless could not be
used to correct the Cts for other assays.
Reagent stability
qPCR reagents protected from light and stored in tubing coils
(Fig. 1e) on the MFB at room temperature showed remarkable
stability for at least 2 months (Table 2). Oddly, we observed rapid
degradation of the SAR11 and marine crenarcheal 16S rRNA
gene and rbcL assays within one week following recovery of the
instrument from its pressure housing post-deployment. This only
occurred after a complete cycle of placing the ESP in its housing,
deploying it, and recovering the instrument from the housing;
reagents were stable while the instrument was in its pressure
housing. Subsequent testing of the recovered reagents showed the
FAM-BHQ primer probe mixes were compromised, but not the
enzyme or IPC (data not shown). These results differed from
FAM-BHQ stability tests run on the MFB while it was maintained
in the laboratory. The mechanism underlying destabilization of
the FAM-BHQ-labeled probe as result of cycling the instrument
through the process of placing it in, and recovering it from the
pressure housing is not yet understood.
Field Testing of ESP-MFB
The ESP was moored in Monterey Bay from May 14–June 11,
2009 where it ran 26 pre-scheduled assays that included 22 native
samples processed using ribotype arrays along with two negative
control (i.e., negative lysate and NTC) qPCR runs. Observed
population shifts in the microbial community were clearly
associated with varying oceanographic conditions (e.g., upwelling
events and phytoplankton blooms, Figures 5 and 6). In addition,
the Cts of the IPC assay for all the controls and native samples
were within one standard deviation (average = 35.360.93),
indicating no overt PCR inhibition.
Negative controls were run on the instrument pre-deployment,
twice during the deployment (May 17 and May 30) and once postdeployment.
For the assays targeting microorganisms from the
environment, no amplification was observed for the NTCs or from
the eluate of the negative lysates if the Ct of the previous field
sample was .26. Residual template was detected in the eluate of
all the negative lysates for SAR11, but only for the first negative
control run in the field for marine crenarchaea. In each case, these
groups were very abundant in the previous field sample (Figure 5).
As expected, the Ct of the negative lysate was shifted 10–12 cycles
higher than the preceding native sample. Thus, we estimate that
system-wide sample carryover accounted for ,0.3% of targeted
genes to the subsequent native sample.
Regional winds were predominantly upwelling favorable
(alongshore equatorward) during the first half of the deployment
(Figure 5a, May 14–28). Consistent with this wind forcing, the
presence of recently upwelled waters at the ESP mooring was
indicated by relatively cold, saline and nitrate-rich conditions
(Figure 5C). This pattern was interrupted by a wind relaxation
during May 18–20 (Figure 5A), and oceanographic response to the
wind relaxation was evident as a sudden decrease in salinity at the
mooring (Figure 5C). These two periods, May 14–17 and May 20–
28, were associated with different water mass characteristics and
microbial communities. During the earlier period, marine
crenarchaea were detected on the arrays and were found in high
abundance as determined by qPCR. After May 20th, however, the
marine crenarchaea were only detectable with qPCR (Figure 5e)
except for the array on June 5th.
A significant relaxation-reversal of the upwelling favorable
winds occurred during May 27–30, and thereafter upwelling winds
Figure 3. Example of background subtracted standard reactions from ten-fold dilutions of a linearized plasmid containing the 16S
rRNA gene from marine crenarchaea. The inset shows the conversion from Ct to copy number of 16S rRNA genes. See table 1 for assay details.
Symbols from lowest to highest dilution are circles (5.46102 copies/reaction), diamonds (5.46103 copies/reaction), squares (5.46104 copies/reaction)
and triangles (5.46105 copies/reaction), respectively. Replicates from one dilution are the same symbol (open and closed).
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0022522.g003
Application of qPCR on an Ocean Mooring
PLoS ONE | www.plosone.org 7 August 2011 | Volume 6 | Issue 8 | e22522
became weaker and more intermittent than they were during the
first half of the deployment (Figure 5a). This change in regional
wind forcing was associated with warming of ,3uC and freshening
of ,0.3 psu at the mooring during the second half of the
experiment (Figure 5). Within this overall trend of warming and
freshening were two periods of accelerated, inverse variation in
salinity and nitrate, during approximately May 30–31 and June 2–
5 (Figure 5C). Elevated nitrate in low salinity waters was
unexpected for two reasons: (1) elevated nitrate concentrations
are typically associated with relatively saline, recently upwelled
waters, and (2) there was no apparent source of terrestrial
freshwater supply to the mooring site. The first of these anomalous
events was not sampled by AUV or ESP, however, the second
event was sampled by both. AUV surveys revealed the movement
of a cold, low-salinity, nitrate-enriched layer across the mooring in
early June (Figure 6).
Concurrent with the anomalous chemical conditions during
June 2–5 was a 100-fold increase in marine crenarchaeal
abundance as detected by qPCR. By the end of the deployment,
those organisms were below the detection limit of the assay. There
was an overall positive correlation between nitrate concentration
and the marine crenarchaeal abundance (y= 8.524.2e0.4276x
r2 =0.7811). Also during this period, rbcL genes of Synecohcoccus
were first detected with qPCR and then followed by concurrent
signal from the ribotype arrays originating from marine cyanobacteria.
Subsequent samples indicated a bloom of Synechococcus
maximally reaching 7.26106 genes per L seawater on June 9th. In
contrast, the presence of SAR11 rRNA and rRNA genes over the
course of the whole deployment remained relatively constant
regardless of the environmental conditions. Results regarding the
distribution on these groups were as expected given the
environmental conditions at the time of sampling, except for the
detection of marine crenarchaea in the anomalous water layer that
flowed across the mooring in early June.
Discussion
The application of qPCR for assessing microbial genomic
capacity and activity has provided a wealth of insights into
understanding the distribution and function of organisms in
response to environmental fluctuations [6,7,36,48,49,50]. The goal
of this study was to assess the feasibility of using that technique in a
remote sensory context to advance both the concept and
technology underpinning ‘‘ecogenomic sensors’’ [16]. Towards
that end, we incorporated a real-time PCR instrument [18] within
the ESP system. This required devising sample handling consistent
with nucleic acid purification and qPCR protocols that allow the
hands-off operation of re-usable flow-through system components,
including a solid phase extraction column and PCR module. We
tested reagent stability and the performance of the system with
Figure 4. Reproducibility and performance of the decontamination
protocols between replicate field samples analyzed by
the MFB. Panels show amplification curves of SAR11 16S rRNA genes
from samples processed in the following order, field-collected sample
(A), NTC (B, squares), a negative lysate (B, circles) and a replicate field
sample (C). The above series was repeated a total of three times, only
the first series is depicted. The average Ct (at delta fluorescence of 200;
horizontal line) and standard deviation of the replicate reactions from
one nucleic acid extract is shown for each field sample.
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0022522.g004
Table 2. Stability of qPCR assays held at ambient
temperature on the MFB.
Assay Label Test Length Initial Ct Final Ct
IPC NED/MGB 5 months 34.2 33.2
Marine Crenarchaea FAM/BHQ 4 months 27.0 26.9
SAR11 FAM/BHQ 2 months 28.8 28.6
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0022522.t002
Application of qPCR on an Ocean Mooring
PLoS ONE | www.plosone.org 8 August 2011 | Volume 6 | Issue 8 | e22522
Figure 5. Environmental conditions and real time results from the ESP deployed at station M0, Monterey Bay from May 14–June 11,
2009. Hourly winds measured at station M2 that indicate regional forcing (A). Colored bar indicates strong upwelling conditions (blue), relaxationreversal
of upwelling favorable winds (white), and conditions dominated by local physical processes (black). The dashed lines show the lag response
between the atmospheric and oceanographic data. CTD data (binned to 3 hours) from the moored ESP included chlorophyll (B), salinity, nitrate and
temperature (C). Only a subset of the bacterioplankton groups detected on the ribotype arrays are shown (D). Array signals for SAR11, marine
crenarchaea, and marine Roseobacter were converted to ng target rRNA per mL lysate using standard curves [35]. The average raw pixel intensity
from array probe spots is presented for marine cyanobacteria. Marine crenarchaeal 16S rRNA, SAR11 16S rRNA and Synechococcus rbcL genes,
expressed as copies per L seawater (E). Starred data points in panel E represent genes detected but unquantifiable (Ct,102 standard) and Xs mark
dates when the negative controls were run.
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0022522.g005
Application of qPCR on an Ocean Mooring
PLoS ONE | www.plosone.org 9 August 2011 | Volume 6 | Issue 8 | e22522
published assays of genes (rRNA or functional) from three
abundant microbial groups associated with different oceanic
regimes in Monterey Bay. This study demonstrated for the first
time that gene abundances could be assessed autonomously
underwater in near real-time and referenced against prevailing
chemical, physical and bulk biological conditions (Figure 5).
Sample handling and solid phase extraction
Sample collection and homogenization used here was applicable
for both qPCR and sandwich hybridization methodology. This
allowed us to leverage already developed methods for the
collection and homogenization of samples for bacterioplankton
community rRNA analysis [35]. A single lysate generated by the
ESP could be modified for downstream processing of nucleic acid
extraction and DNA probe arrays. Thus, each sample was
analyzed by multiple detection methods, providing the ability to
corroborate results obtained on the instrument.
Our method of nucleic acid extraction used on theMFB produced
DNA of comparable quality and quantity to laboratory-processed
samples. Matched samples had comparable extraction efficiencies
and gene abundances as determined spectrophotometrically and by
qPCR analysis, respectively. In addition, and as discussed in greater
detail below, tests with integrated sample preparation and qPCR
show that the SPE column is reusable, permitting serial processing
and analysis of field samples after system decontamination.
PCR reagent storage
Our method of reagent handing and storage was adequate for
both laboratory testing and field deployments. All qPCR reagents
were stored on the MFB at ambient temperature in coiled tubing
for up to 5 months. This reagent storage method, although
unconventional compared to normal laboratory procedures,
showed little variability in assay performance for extended periods
of time at ambient temperatures (Table 1). Similar reagent
handling practices were used on the Autonomous Pathogen
Detection System (APDS), however in that system the reagents
were replenished weekly [18,22,27]. Long-term stability tests of
reagents are critical, as subsurface operation of an instrument
makes reagent re-supply difficult, if not impossible.
Re-usable flow-through PCR module
Modifications to the flow-through PCR module originally
developed for the APDS [18,22,27] were performed to meet
specific requirements of the ESP. These included low power (10–
14 volts), two-channel optical detectors, and interoperability with
ESP control and data acquisition. The flow-through module
performs sequential analysis of a template using a variety of
primer-probe and enzyme combinations. Potential template
sources included negative controls (no template and no sample
controls), nucleic acids from field-collected samples or userintroduced
standards.
We observed good reproducibility and PCR efficiency of
reactions built and thermocycled on the MFB. Replicate runs of
standards (Figure 3) and nucleic acids from field samples (Figure 4)
produced similar Cts. Standard curves produced similar PCR
efficiencies to those run on laboratory equipment (Table 1).
Both the SPE and qPCR module were reusable, flow-through
devices so the components were cleaned with bleach and water
between discrete sample processing events. These procedures
resulted in no observed carryover of amplicons or templates
between running standard reactions and no template controls.
However, we did observe some carryover between environmental
samples (,1%) and a loss in column extraction efficiency with
repeated use (n= 30, 25% change). Both carryover and loss of
extraction efficiency introduced negligible effects on the estimated
gene abundances in field samples processed by the MFB. In fact,
our procedures produced qPCR results that were reproducible
within and between samples (Figure 4) and similar to laboratoryprocessed
samples. Because of the issues discussed above and
known bias inherent with nucleic acid extraction and qPCR
[51,52], we interpreted data from field samples detected with
environmentally-targeted assays as a reflection of relative changes
in microbial abundance, not a measure of absolute abundance.
At this point, we chose not to further optimize assay conditions.
Instead, we focused on field trials to address the larger issues of
operating autonomously, subsurface in the ocean. Those challenges
included end-to-end, sample acquisition, preparation and
processing for analyte detection coupled with data transfer to a
shore side receiver.
Field testing
For deployments of the ESP-MFB, we targeted genes of selected
bacterioplankton groups known to be abundant in the different
oceanic regimes in Monterey Bay. The historical time series
investigations allowed interpretation and verification of results
produced by the ESP. In addition, a commercially available
internal positive control (IPC) was run on each sample to assess
non-specific sample inhibition, provide confidence in negative
results obtained from environmentally targeted assays, and verify
the qPCR enzyme was not compromised. With the volumes of
seawater processed by the ESP during the deployment, none of the
field samples used in qPCR reactions exhibited inhibition.
Figure 6. Water mass variability in temperature, salinity and
nitrate concentration around the ESP mooring as mapped by
an autonomous underwater vehicle (AUV). The synoptic survey
was comprised of 138 profiles acquired in 3 hours, between June 2
22:30 and June 3 01:30, 2009. The survey domain is 2.3 km E-W and N-S
and depth range 0–30 m. The view is from the NE. White box indicates
the depth and position of the ESP during sampling.
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0022522.g006
Application of qPCR on an Ocean Mooring
PLoS ONE | www.plosone.org 10 August 2011 | Volume 6 | Issue 8 | e22522
While deployed, the ESP targeted members of the bacterioplankton
community in seawater samples using ribotype arrays
and qPCR assays for the 16S rRNA gene of SAR11, the 16S
rRNA gene of marine crenarchaea, and the large subunit
RuBisCO (rbcL) of Synechococcus. In addition, sensors on the ESP
mooring, other Monterey Bay moorings, and an autonomous
underwater vehicle (AUV) performing surveys around the
instrument, aided in determining conditions that affected the
ESP mooring and provided context to the in situ processed
samples.
The ESP was deployed during the spring-summer upwelling
season of the Monterey Bay. The ESP detected changes in
microbial abundances of the targeted genes that corresponded
with different oceanographic regimes; marine crenarchaea were
most abundant during the strong upwelling period and the
Synechococcus bloomed late in the deployment when local
advective processes dominated. SAR11 showed the least change;
it was abundant throughout the deployment regardless of
environmental conditions. The distributions of the bacterioplankon
groups were similar to previously published distributions in
Monterey Bay [6,35,44,53,54]. However, as previous studies of
marine crenarchaeal population dynamics indicated its abundance
at depth and seasonally occurring at the surface coinciding with
upwelling conditions [50,53,55–57], the association of marine
crenarchaea with high nitrate, low salinity water was unexpected.
Low salinity intrusions originating offshore do enter the Monterey
Bay [58], but associated nitrate concentrations are typically low.
The results of this study have thus motivated investigation of how
subsurface low-salinity intrusions may become nutrient-enriched,
and what the causative processes mean for shelf nutrient budgets.
Results from the field deployed ESP-MFB provide proof that the
system and methods defined here were capable of detecting such
well documented changes in gene abundance and show its
potential in discovering alternative niches of specific bacterioplankton
groups that were previously not known.
Conclusions and future directions
In addition to bacterioplankton detection, the ESP has
previously shown its utility in processing samples for harmful
algae [15,28,30,33,34,38,45] and invertebrates [29,32]; the
addition of a qPCR capability creates new opportunities for
utilizing this technology and provides an additional tool to
augment autonomous ocean sensing networks. While our
protocols are sufficient for migrating pre-existing qPCR assays
from lab use to the ESP, there remain many opportunities for
improving this procedure and experimenting with other polymerases,
multiplexing strategies, alternative reagent storage, and the
incorporation of template extraction controls, etc.
To our knowledge, this report is the first in situ oceanic
application of qPCR in an autonomous field deployable
instrument. We are working to extend that capability by
combining it with new methods of sample archival [37] and
event-triggered sample acquisition driven by sensors bundled with
the ESP or available through a distributed sensor network. With
the expansion of coastal and global ocean observatories, we
anticipate new opportunities for developing and fielding ecogenomic
sensors on fixed or mobile platforms [33,36]. For the first
time ever, ocean observing systems will allow investigators to carry
out interactive, molecular analytical experiments remotely to test
hypotheses and conduct routine monitoring. With the ESP now
being available commercially (Spyglass, Marina, CA), we anticipate
greater availability of the platform and wider spread usage in
the near future.
Acknowledgments
The authors are indebted to the expertise and dedication of the engineers,
technicians and machinists at MBARI for developing maintaining the
instrument. We also wish to acknowledge Julie Robidart and Nilo Alvarado
for helping with the ESP deployment and thank two anonymous reviewers
for their useful comments. We also thank the crew of MBARI’s R/V
Zephyr and AUV operations team for their assistance at sea. The M2 wind
data were provided by MBARI. MODIS data were provided by the Level
1 and Atmosphere Archive and Distribution System (LAADS). All research
presented here from within the Monterey Bay National Marine Sanctuary
was in accordance with the National Marine Sanctuaries Act. The permit
MBNMS-2005-010-A2 was issued to MBARI by the National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) in 2005 and is renewed annually.
This is LLNL manuscript number LLNL-JRNL-480573.
Author Contributions
Conceived and designed the experiments: CAS CMP JB AH JPZ.
Performed the experiments: CMP AH KT RM. Analyzed the data: CMP
JPR. Contributed reagents/materials/analysis tools: CMP AH BR RM
KT CAS. Wrote the paper: CMP CAS JB. Responsible for instrument
deployment: DP SJ RM CE. Wrote the software to run the ESP: BR AH.
Led development of the PCR module, etc: JMD. Contributed to SPE: MA.
References
1. Giovannoni SJ, Rappe MS (2000) Evolution, diversity, and molecular ecology of
marine prokaryotes. In: Kirchman DL, ed. Microbial Ecology of the Ocean.
New York: Wilery Interscience. pp 47–84.
2. DeLong EF (2009) The microbial ocean from genomes to biomes. Nature 459:
200–206.
3. Zehr JP, Hewson I, Moisander PH (2009) Molecular biology techniques and
applications for ocean sensing. Ocean Sci 5: 101–113.
4. Heid CA, Stevens J, Livak KJ, Williams PM (1996) Real time quantitative PCR.
Genome Res 6: 986–994.
5. Suzuki MT, Taylor LT, DeLong EF (2000) Quantitative analysis of smallsubunit
rRNA genes in mixed microbial populations via 59-nuclease assays. Appl
Environ Microbiol 66: 4605–4614.
6. Suzuki MT, Preston CM, Chavez FP, DeLong EF (2001) Quantitative mapping
of bacterioplankton populations in seawater: Field tests across an upwelling
plume in Monterey Bay. Aquat Microb Ecol 24: 117–127.
7. Short SM, Zehr JP (2005) Quantitative analysis of nifh genes and transcripts
from aquatic environments. Methods Enzymol 397: 380–394.
8. Smith CJ, Osborn AM (2009) Advantages and limitations of quantitative PCR
(q-PCR)-based approaches in microbial ecology. FEMS Microbiol Ecol 67:
6–20.
9. Whitman RL, Ge Z, Nevers MB, Boehm AB, Chern EC, et al. (2010)
Relationship and variation of qPCR and culturable Enterococci estimates in
ambient surface waters are predictable. Environmental Science & Technology
44: 5049–5054.
10. Fasham MJR, Balino BM, Bowles MC, Anderson R, Archer D, et al. (2001) A
new vision of ocean biogeochemistry after a decade of the Joint Global Ocean
Flux Study (JGOFS). Ambio. pp 4–31.
11. Karl DM, Dore JE, Lukas R, Michaels A, Bates NR, et al. (2001) Building the
long-term picture: The U.S. JGOFS time-series programs. Oceanography 14:
6–17.
12. Karl DM (2002) Nutrient dynamics in the deep blue sea. Trends in
Microbiology 10: 410–418.
13. Paul JH, Scholin C, van Den Engh G, Perry MJ (2007) In situ instrumentation.
Oceanography 20: 58–66.
14. Bowler C, Karl DM, Colwell RR (2009) Microbial oceanography in a sea of
opportunity. Nature 459: 180–184.
15. Scholin C, Doucette G, Jensen S, Roman B, Pargett D, et al. (2009) Remote
detection of marine microbes, small invertebrates, harmful algae, and biotoxins
using the environmental sample processor (esp). Oceanography 22: 158–167.
16. Scholin CA (2010) What are ‘‘Ecogenomic sensors?’’ – a review and thoughts for
the future. Ocean Sci Discuss 6: 51–60.
17. Bruckner-Lea CJ, Tsukuda T, Dockendorff B, Follansbee JC, Kingsley MT,
et al. (2002) Renewable microcolumns for automated DNA purification and
flow-through amplification: From sediment samples through polymerase chain
reaction. Analytica Chimica Acta 469: 129–140.
18. Belgrader P, Elkin CJ, Brown SB, Nasarabadi SN, Langlois RG, et al. (2003) A
reusable flow-through polymerase chain reaction instrument for the continuous
monitoring of infectious biological agents. Anal Chem 75: 3446–3450.
Application of qPCR on an Ocean Mooring
PLoS ONE | www.plosone.org 11 August 2011 | Volume 6 | Issue 8 | e22522
19. Chandler DP, Jarrell AE (2004) Automated purification and suspension array
detection of 16s rrna from soil and sediment extracts by using tunable surface
microparticles. Appl Environ Microbiol 70: 2621–2631.
20. Fukuba T, Yamamoto T, Niganuma T, Fuji T (2004) Microfabricated flowthrough
device for DNA amplification - towards in situ gene analysis. Chem
Eng J 101: 151–156.
21. Hindson BJ, Brown SB, Marshall GD, McBride MT, Makarewicz AJ, et al.
(2004) Development of an automated sample preparation module for
environmental monitoring of biowarfare agents. Anal Chem 76: 3492–3497.
22. Hindson BJ, McBride MT, Makarewicz AJ, Henderer BD, Setlur US, et al.
(2005) Autonomous detection of aerosolized biological agents by multiplexed
immunoassay with polymerase chain reaction confirmation. Anal Chem 77:
284–289.
23. Straub TM, Dockendorff BP, QuiO ` onez-DI ` az MD, Valdez CO,
Shutthanandan JI, et al. (2005) Automated methods for multiplexed pathogen
detection. Journal of Microbiological Methods 62: 303–316.
24. Casper ET, Patterson SS, Bhaunushali P, Farmer A, Smith M, et al. (2007) A
handheld NASBA analyzer for the field detection and quantification of Karenia
brevis. Harmful Algae 6: 112–118.
25. LaGier MJ, Fell JW, Goodwin KD (2007) Electrochemical detection of harmful
algae and other microbial contaminants in coastal waters using hand-held
biosensors. Mar Pollut Bull 54: 757–770.
26. Hindson BJ, Gutierrez DM, Ness KD, Makarewicz AJ, Metz TR, et al. (2008)
Development of an automated DNA purification module using a microfabricated
pillar chip. Analyst 133: 248–255.
27. Regan JF, Makarewicz AJ, Hindson BJ, Metz TR, Gutierrez DM, et al. (2008)
Environmental monitoring for biological threat agents using the autonomous
pathogen detection system with multiplexed polymerase chain reaction. Anal
Chem 80: 7422–7429.
28. Scholin CA, Massion EI, Mellinger E, Brown M, Wright DE, et al. The
development and application of molecular probes and novel instrumentation for
detection of harmful algae; 1998. Marine Technology Society 367–370.
29. Goffredi SK, Jones WJ, Scholin CA, Marin R, 3rd, Vrijenhoek RC (2006)
Molecular detection of marine invertebrate larvae. Mar Biotechnol 8: 149–160.
30. Greenfield DI, Marin III R, Jensen S, Massion E, Roman B, et al. (2006)
Application of the environmental sample processor (esp) for quantifying Pseudonitzschia
australis using ribosomal RNA-targeted probes in sandwich and
fluorescent in situ hybridization. Limnology and Oceanography, Methods 4:
426–435.
31. Haywood AJS, C.A., Marin R, III, Steidinger KA, Heil C, Ray J (2007)
Molecular detection of the brevetoxin-producing dinoflagellate Karenia brevis and
closely related species using rrna-targeted probes and a semiautomated sandwich
hybridization assay. Journal of Phycology 43: 1271–1286.
32. Jones WJ, Preston CM, Marin III R, Scholin CA, Vrijenhoek RC (2007) A
robotic molecular method for in situ detection of marine invertebrate larvae.
Molecular Ecology Resources 8: 540–550.
33. Greenfield DI, III RM, Doucette GJ, Mikulski C, Jensen S, et al. (2008) Field
applications of the second-generation Environmental Sample Processor (ESP) for
remote detection of harmful algae: 2006–2007. Limnol Oceanogr Methods. pp
667–679.
34. Doucette GJ, Mikulski GM, Jones KL, King KL, Greenfield DI, et al. (2009)
Remote, subsurface detection of the algal toxin domoic acid onboard the
environmental sample processor: Assay development and initial field trials.
Harmful Algae 8: 880–888.
35. Preston CM, Marin R, 3rd, Jensen SD, Feldman J, Birch JM, et al. (2009) Near
real-time, autonomous detection of marine bacterioplankton on a coastal
mooring in Monterey Bay, California, using rRNA-targeted DNA probes.
Environ Microbiol 11: 1168–1180.
36. Ryan J, Greenfield D, Marin III R, Preston CM, Roman B, et al. (2011)
Harmful phytoplankton ecology studies using an autonomous molecular
analytical and ocean observing network. Limnol Oceanogr 56: 1255–1272.
37. Ottesen EA, Marin III R, Preston CM, Young CR, Ryan JP, et al. (2011)
Metatranscriptomic analysis of autonomously collected and preserved marine
bacterioplankton. ISME J.
38. Scholin CA, Massion EI, Wright D, Cline D, Mellinger E, et al. (2001) Aquatic
autosampler device. U.S Patent Number 6187530.
39. Roman B, Scholin C, Jensen S, Marin III R, Massion E, et al. (2005) The 2nd
generation Environmental Sample Processor: Evolution of a robotic underwater
biochemical laboratory. In OCEANS 2005 MTS/IEEE Conference. Washington
DC: Marine Technology Society. pp 1–9.
40. Roman B, Scholin C, Jensen S, Massion E, Marin III R, et al. (2007) Controlling
a robotic marine water sampler with the ruby scripting language. Journal of
American Laboratory Automation 12: 56–61.
41. Tyrrell JV, Bergquist PR, Bergquist PL, Scholin CA (2001) Detection and
enumeration of Heterosigma akashiwo and Fibrocapsa japonica (Raphidophyceae)
using RNA-targeted oligonucleotide probes. Phycologia 40: 457–467.
42. Ruzicka J, Marshall GD (1990) Sequential injection: A new concept for chemical
censors, process analysis and laboratory assays. Analytica Chimica Acta 237:
39–343.
43. Ahlfors C, Marshall GD, Wolcott DK, Olson DC, Van Overmeire B (2005)
Measurement of unbound bilirubin by the peroxidase test using zone fluidics.
Clin Chim Acta 365: 75–85.
44. Paerl R, Turk K, Beinart R, Chavez F, Zehr JP (in press) Seasonal change in
Synechococcus and Synechococcus narB subgroup abundances at monterey bay
monitoring site m0. Environmental Microbiology.
45. Scholin CA, Doucette GJ, Cambella AD (2008) Prospects for developing
automated systems for in situ detection of harmful algae and their toxins.
Babin M, Roesler C, Cullen J, eds. Paris, France: UNESCO Publishing. pp
413–462.
46. Johnson KS, Coletti LJ (2002) In situ ultraviolet spectrophotometry for high
resolution and long term monitoring of nitrate, bromide and bisulfide in the
ocean. Deep-Sea Res I 49: 1291–1305.
47. Ryan JP, Johnson SB, Sherman A, Rajan K, Py F, et al. (2010) Mobile
autonomous process sampling within coastal ocean observing systems. Limnol
Oceanogr Methods 8: 394–402.
48. Church MJ, Short CM, Jenkins BD, Karl DM, Zehr JP (2005) Temporal
patterns of nitrogenase gene (nifh) expression in the oligotrophic North Pacific
Ocean. Appl Environ Microbiol 71: 5362–5370.
49. Dong LF, Smith CJ, Papaspyrou S, Stott A, Osborn AM, et al. (2009) Changes
in benthic denitrification, nitrate ammonification, and anammox process rates
and nitrate and nitrite reductase gene abundances along an estuarine nutrient
gradient (the Colne Estuary, United Kingdom). Appl Environ Microbiol 75:
3171–3179.
50. Santoro AE, Casciotti KL, Francis CA (2010) Activity, abundance and diversity
of nitrifying archaea and bacteria in the central California current. Environ
Microbiol 12: 1989–2006.
51. Bostrom KH, Simu K, Hagstrom A, Riemann L (2004) Optimization of DNA
extraction for quantitative marine bacterioplankton community analysis. Limnol
Oceanogr Methods 2: 365–373.
52. Rowan AK, Davenport RJ, Snape JR, Fearnside D, Barer MR, et al. (2005)
Development of a rapid assay for determining the relative abundance of
bacteria. Appl Environ Microbiol 71: 8481–8490.
53. Mincer TJ, Church MJ, Taylor LT, Preston C, Karl DM, et al. (2007)
Quantitative distribution of presumptive archaeal and bacterial nitrifiers in
Monterey Bay and the North Pacific Subtropical Gyre. Environ Microbiol 9:
1162–1175.
54. Paerl RW, Johnson KS, Walsh RM, Worden AZ, Chavez FP, et al. (2011)
Differential distributions of synechococcus subgroups across the California
Current system. Front Microbio 2(Article 59): 1–22.
55. Karner MB, DeLong EF, Karl DM (2001) Archaeal dominance in the
mesopelagic zone of the Pacific Ocean. Nature 409: 507–510.
56. Wuchter C, Abbas B, Coolen MJ, Herfort L, van Bleijswijk J, et al. (2006)
Archaeal nitrification in the ocean. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 103:
12317–12322.
57. Herfort L, Schouten S, Abbas B, Veldhuis MJ, Coolen MJ, et al. (2007)
Variations in spatial and temporal distribution of archaea in the North Sea in
relation to environmental variables. FEMS Microbiol Ecol 62: 242–257.
58. Ryan JP, McManus MA, Sullivan JM (2010) Interacting physical, chemical and
biological forcing of phytoplankton thin-layer variability in Monterey Bay,
California. Continental Shelf Research 30: 7–16.
Application of qPCR on an Ocean Mooring
PLoS ONE | www.plosone.org 12 August 2011 | Volume 6 | Issue 8 | e22522

A quantitative model of nucleosome dynamics
Robert A. Forties1, Justin A. North1, Sarah Javaid2,3, Omar P. Tabbaa1,
Richard Fishel1,2,3, Michael G. Poirier1,2,3,4 and Ralf Bundschuh1,2,4,5,*
1Department of Physics, 2Biophysics Graduate Program, 3Department of Molecular Virology, Immunology,
and Medical Genetics, Human Cancer Genetics, 4Department of Biochemistry and 5Center for RNA Biology,
The Ohio State University, 191 West Woodruff Avenue, Columbus, Ohio 43210-1117, USA
Received November 2, 2010; Revised April 21, 2011; Accepted May 9, 2011
ABSTRACT
The expression, replication and repair of eukaryotic
genomes require the fundamental organizing unit
of chromatin, the nucleosome, to be unwrapped
and disassembled. We have developed a quantitative
model of nucleosome dynamics which
provides a fundamental understanding of these
DNA processes. We calibrated this model using
results from high precision single molecule nucleosome
unzipping experiments, and then tested its
predictions for experiments in which nucleosomes
are disassembled by the DNA mismatch recognition
complex hMSH2-hMSH6. We found that this
calibrated model quantitatively describes hMSH2-
hMSH6 induced disassembly rates of nucleosomes
with two separate DNA sequences and four distinct
histone modification states. In addition, this model
provides mechanistic insight into nucleosome
disassembly by hMSH2-hMSH6 and the influence
of histone modifications on this disassembly
reaction. This model’s precise agreement with
current experiments suggests that it can be
applied more generally to provide important mechanistic
understanding of the numerous nucleosome
alterations that occur during DNA processing.
INTRODUCTION
Eukaryotic DNA is packaged into chromatin by wrapping
around histone protein octamers to form nucleosomes
(1,2). These nucleosomes sterically occlude replication,
transcription and repair complexes from their DNA
target sites. DNA processing complexes appear to access
their target sites via nucleosome unwrapping (3–5) and
disassembly (6). However, the mechanism(s) associated
with these nucleosome structural alterations are not well
understood. An essential component in appreciating these
nucleosome alterations is a quantitative and predictive
model describing DNA unwrapping and disassembly
from the histone octamer. Such a model will provide a
critical tool in understanding in vivo DNA processing
within chromatin.
The key concept in a model of nucleosomal DNA
unwrapping is the unwrapping free energy landscape.
This landscape quantitatively captures the free energy
cost of unwrapping each individual base pair from the
histone octamer. Previous studies determined qualitative
features of the structure of this free energy landscape (4,5).
Here, we develop a free energy landscape that not only
accounts for these qualitative observations, but is
calibrated from precise mechanical unzipping measurements
of nucleosomal DNA (7). These experiments
apply a force to pull apart the DNA base pairing, which
concurrently unwraps the DNA from the histone octamer.
We extract detailed information about the energy landscape
from these experiments. By carefully adjusting our
energy landscape, we obtain an excellent agreement with
the highly complex measured unzipping profiles.
We then use this calibrated free energy landscape to
model a completely separate experiment that investigates
nucleosome disassembly by the human DNA mismatch
recognition complex, hMSH2-hMSH6. This complex
appears to function as a molecular switch that specifically
binds DNA mismatches in the ADP bound form (8,9).
Upon the exchange of ADP for ATP, hMSH2-hMSH6
forms a sliding clamp that diffuses along duplex DNA.
This allows for iterative loading of multiple hMSH2-
hMSH6 complexes onto the duplex DNA surrounding
a mismatch, which directs the excision reaction during
DNA mismatch repair.
This mismatch recognition process must occur within
chromatin. Recently, it was demonstrated that hMSH2–
hMSH6 disassembles nucleosomes near a DNA mismatch
and that histone modifications in the DNA–histone interface
of the nucleosome dramatically enhance the rate of
disassembly (10,11). These results indicate that hMSH2-
hMSH6 not only recognizes DNA mismatches but
*To whom correspondence should be addressed. Tel:+614 688 3978; Fax:+614 292 7557; Email: bundschuh@mps.ohio-state.edu
Nucleic Acids Research, 2011, 1–8
doi:10.1093/nar/gkr422
 The Author(s) 2011. Published by Oxford University Press.
This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Non-Commercial License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/
by-nc/3.0), which permits unrestricted non-commercial use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.
Nucleic Acids Research Advance Access published July 14, 2011
Downloaded from nar.oxfordjournals.org by guest on July 21, 2011
facilitates the DNA excision reaction by ensuring the
DNA surrounding a mismatch is nucleosome and
perhaps protein free. It was proposed that hMSH2-
hMSH6 disassembles nucleosomes by trapping DNA
unwrapping fluctuations through iterative loading of
hMSH2-hMSH6 at the DNA mismatch (10).
We modeled this nucleosome disassembly process with
our free energy landscape and found that disassembly of
unmodified nucleosomes can be quantitatively understood
using the same free energy landscape applied to unzipping
experiments. We explain the influence of histone post
translational modifications (PTMs) and DNA sequence
on the disassembly rates with modest changes to the
free energy landscape based on the location of the modifications
and the known influence of DNA sequence and
histone modifications on DNA–histone binding free
energies (4,11,12). Furthermore, our model provides
detailed mechanistic insight into the process of nucleosome
disassembly by hMSH2-hMSH6.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Calculation of the dynamics of nucleosome unwrapping
We treat the time evolution of the probability that n
base pairs of nucleosomal DNA are unwrapped as a
continuous-time Markov process. This allows us to write
the rates of wrapping krewrapðnÞ and unwrapping kunwrapðnÞ
in a rate matrix Tn,n0 , which is defined by
Tn,n+1 ¼ kunwrapðnÞ ð1Þ
Tn+1,n ¼ krewrapðnÞ, ð2Þ
with all other entries in Tn,n0 equal to zero. This rate matrix
satisfies the master equation
dPnðtÞ
dt
¼
X
n0
Tn,n0Pn0 ðtÞ, ð3Þ
where PnðtÞ is the time–dependent probability of observing
the unwrapped state n. The rate matrix Tn,n0 contains all
of the information about the influence of external constraints,
such as an applied force or a protein complex,
on the probability and time evolution of each partially
unwrapped nucleosome state n. Below, we describe how
we determine the rate matrix that describes the influence
of a mechanical unzipping force and a pressure from
bound hMSH2-hMSH6 complexes on the nucleosome
unwrapping probability and its time evolution. However,
once this rate matrix is set up, the following solution to
the master equation may be applied to any system where
nucleosomes are unwrapped.
We solve the eigenvalue problem for this master
equation to obtain PnðtÞ. We compute the eigenvalues i
and eigenvectors Vi,n of Tn,n0 numerically (13). We then use
the inverse of the matrix of eigenvectors V1
i,n to express the
initial state in the basis of the eigenvectors
~P
ið0Þ ¼
X
n
V1
i,n Pnð0Þ, ð4Þ
where Pnð0Þ is the initial state in the basis of the
unwrapping states. If the nucleosome is fully wrapped at
time zero, then P0ð0Þ ¼ 1 and Pið0Þ ¼ 0 for i 6¼ 0. This
then allows us to write the solution to Equation 3 as
PnðtÞ ¼
X
i
Vi,n ~Pið0Þ expðjijtÞ: ð5Þ
The term expðjijtÞ propagates each eigenvector with
a decay rate given by its eigenvalue, and we multiply by
Vi,n to transform back into the basis of unwrapping states.
This solution allows us to calculate the complete dynamics
of nucleosome unwrapping rapidly.
Rates of nucleosome unzipping
In unzipping experiments, an applied force F breaks
apart the base pairing of DNA containing a nucleosome,
which simultaneously unwraps the nucleosome. We
compute kunwrapðnÞ and krewrapðnÞ, the rates of nucleosome
unwrapping and rewrapping at n unwrapped base pairs,
using the Gibbs free energy difference between the change
in our energy landscape GnucðnÞ due to unwrapping and
the work done on the nucleosome by the applied force.
We multiply the base rate for wrapping fluctuations k0 by
a Gibbs factor, resulting in
kunwrapðnÞ ¼ k0e½ðFFunzipðnÞÞxGnucðnÞ=kBT ð6Þ
krewrapðnÞ ¼ k0e½ðFFunzipðnÞÞð1Þx=kBT, ð7Þ
where kB is Boltzmann’s constant and T is the temperature.
The applied force F acts over a distance x
per opened base pair, and FunzipðnÞ is the force required
to break the DNA base pairing and stretch the DNA. Of
the remaining force, a fraction  increases the unwrapping
rate and ð1  Þ decreases the rewrapping rate. The parameter
 represents the relative position of the transition
state between n and n+1 unwrapped base pairs. We may
then insert these rates of unwrapping and rewrapping into
Equations 1 and 2, and follow the procedure outlined
in the previous section to calculate the dynamics of
nucleosome unwrapping in unzipping experiments.
Calculation of dynamics in the presence of
hMSH2-hMSH6
When hMSH2-hMSH6 is present we must model its binding
to the DNA, the interactions between hMSH2-hMSH6
molecules, and the interactions between hMSH2-hMSH6
and the nucleosome. Given that the rate of hMSH2-
hMSH6 diffusion along the DNA is faster than all other
rates in the system, we treat hMSH2-hMSH6 diffusion as
being in equilibrium with respect to all other processes in the
system. We may then model the hMSH2-hMSH6 molecules
as a 1D gas of hard spheres. This is known as a Tonks gas,
and has a partition function given by (14)
ZN,l ¼ ðl  NÞN=N!, ð8Þ
where N is the number of hMSH2-hMSH6 molecules
bound to the DNA,  is the footprint of hMSH2-hMSH6
in base pairs and l is the length of the DNA segment available
to hMSH2-hMSH6 in base pairs (Figure 2A).
2 Nucleic Acids Research, 2011
Downloaded from nar.oxfordjournals.org by guest on July 21, 2011
To confirm that use of the Tonks gas solution is valid, for
select cases we also performed simulations of the dynamics
including each hMSH2-hMSH6 particle individually. We
find that approximating the hMSH2-hMSH6 behavior as
a Tonks gas gives results nearly identical to these simulations,
and is much more computationally efficient
(Supplementary Figure S1).
We can then use the Tonks gas partition function to
calculate the probability that the bound hMSH2-hMSH6
molecules will block nucleosome rewrapping or the
binding of more hMSH2-hMSH6. The probability that
there are no hMSH2-hMSH6 particles within x base
pairs of one end of the available DNA segment for
x < ðl  NÞ is
}N,lðxÞ ¼
ZN,lx
ZN,l
¼
l  N  x
l  N
 N
: ð9Þ
To calculate the rates of unwrapping, kunwrapðnÞ, and
rewrapping, krewrapðnÞ, we multiply the base rate for
wrapping fluctuations k0 by a Gibbs factor determined
from our free energy landscape, as in Equations 6 and 7
kunwrapðnÞ ¼ k0eGnucðnÞ=kBT ð10Þ
krewrapðnÞ ¼ k0}N,lð1Þ, ð11Þ
where }N,lð1Þ is the probability that an hMSH2-MSH6
particle does not block rewrapping of one base pair.
Similarly, the rate of hMSH2-hMSH6 binding at the
mismatch is
kbind
N,l ¼ kbind
0,l }N,lðnM+=2Þ, ð12Þ
where kbind
0,l is the rate of binding to bare DNA of length
l, nM is the mismatch position, and }N,lðnM+=2Þ is the
probability that binding is not blocked by the presence
of another hMSH2-hMSH6 molecule. This assumes that
the mismatch is within 1:5 base pairs of the end of the
DNA segment, such that there cannot be any hMSH2-
hMSH6 molecules between the end of the DNA and the
mismatch when an hMSH2-hMSH6 molecule is bound
at the mismatch. If this is not true, one must sum over
all combinations for the number of hMSH2-hMSH6
complexes bound on either side of the mismatch.
We then calculate the dynamics of nucleosome unwrapping
following the method described in the ‘Calculation of
the dynamics of nucleosome unwrapping’ section. Instead
of indexing the probability in Equation 3 based only on n,
we use u ¼ NL+n, where N is the number hMSH2-
hMSH6 molecules already bound to the DNA, and L is
the maximum number of bases which can unwrap from
the histone before it dissociates from the DNA. This
allows us to write a rate matrix Tu,u0 which includes not
only rates of nucleosome wrapping and unwrapping, but
also hMSH2-hMSH6 binding and dissociation.
RESULTS
Mechanical unzipping of nucleosomes
The most detailed method yet devised to probe nucleosome
dynamics is mechanically unzipping the base
pairing of DNA containing a nucleosome (7). In experiments
performed by the Wang group (7), the nucleosome
is positioned on the 601 high-affinity sequence (15). One
strand of the DNA molecule is attached to a surface, and
the other strand to a bead confined in an optical trap
(Figure 1A). By carefully controlling the movement
of the optical trap, a constant force may be exerted
on the DNA. This force sequentially breaks the
DNA base pairing, increasing the contour length of the
single-stranded DNA between the bead and the surface.
Measuring the position of the bead as a function of time
A
B
C
Figure 1. A free energy landscape consistent with measurements of
mechanical unzipping of nucleosomes. (A) Experimental setup for
unzipping experiments. One strand of the DNA is attached to a
surface, and a constant force F of 28pN is applied to the other end
via a bead in an optical trap, slowly pulling apart the DNA base
pairing. As this unzipping of the base pairing moves through the nucleosome,
the DNA must also be unwrapped from the nucleosome.
(B) Dwell time as a function of the number of DNA base pairs (bp)
unwrapped from the nucleosome. The solid line is determined from
mechanical unzipping experiments, while the dashed line is calculated
from (C) the free energy landscape for DNA unwrapping from a
nucleosome on the 601 positioning sequence. Significant pauses when
20–30 bp are unwrapped (within the entry–exit region) and when
60–80 bp are unwrapped (within the dyad region) correspond to areas
where the free energy landscape changes rapidly.
Nucleic Acids Research, 2011 3
Downloaded from nar.oxfordjournals.org by guest on July 21, 2011
establishes the number of DNA bases that are unpaired.
When DNA wrapped around the nucleosome becomes
critically unpaired, it must dissociate from the nucleosome.
Thus, the number of broken base pairs equals the
number of base pairs unwrapped from the nucleosome
(solid line, Figure 1B). This method probes the interaction
between the nucleosome and the DNA as a function of the
number of base pairs unwrapped from the nucleosome.
We calculate an energy landscape for unwrapping 601
positioning sequence DNA from a nucleosome, which is
consistent with this unzipping data (Figure 1C). To obtain
this landscape, we first create a trial landscape that we use
to compute rates of nucleosome unwrapping. We then use
these rates to calculate unzipping dynamics, and compare
the result with experiments. Finally, we iterate the trial
landscape until we obtain good agreement with experiments
(Figure 1C) while respecting several qualitative
features of the landscape known before our study.
In order to calculate experimental observables given an
energy landscape, we compute kunwrapðnÞ and krewrapðnÞ,
the rates of nucleosome unwrapping and rewrapping
at n unwrapped base pairs, using Equations 6 and 7.
In these experiments, the total applied force F is held
constant at 28pN (7). The force FunzipðnÞ needed
to unzip the base pairing and stretch the DNA can be
calculated as a function of the DNA sequence
(Supplementary Figure S2) (16). This results in an effective
force responsible for nucleosome unwrapping
averaging 10.9 pN, and ranging from 8.6pN to 12.8 pN.
Similarly, the increase in contour length from opening one
base pair x can be calculated to be 1:12 nm at this force
(16). Since the relative position  of the transition state
between n and n+1 unwrapped base pairs is not known
under the geometry of the experiments, we treat it as a fit
parameter.
We find that our results are not very sensitive to the
value of k0, the rate of nucleosome rewrapping in the
absence of an applied force. We can fit the unzipping
data with values of k0 between 106 to 107 base pairs per
minute by simultaneously making small adjustments
to the nucleosome energy landscape and . We used the
value of k0 ¼ 6  106 base pairs per minute that is in the
middle of this range for all subsequent calculations.
The trial landscape must conform to a number of
experimental observations. First, the free energy landscape
should be steepest in the dyad region (between
about 63–84 bp), since the nucleosome contains the
strongest contacts in this region (2,4). Second, the total
height of the free energy landscape must be no more
than 42 kBT, of the free energy cost to disassemble a
nucleosome from a compacted chromatin fiber in
Xenopus egg extracts (17). The buffer conditions and
presence of histone H1 in Xenopus egg extracts allow
for strong interactions between nucleosomes, and promote
chromatin compaction. We expect the free energy cost
to disassemble the recombinant histones examined here
to be significantly smaller, as the measurements are performed
under conditions where chromatin compaction
does not occur.
Third, the steps in the landscape occur approximately
every 5.25 bp, which is the average spacing between DNA
contacts in the nucleosome (2) and between peaks in
the unzipping measurements (7). The positions of the
peaks in the unzipping data (7) are extremely sensitive
to the spacing between the steps in the unzipping landscape.
For example, if we force all steps to be separated
by exactly 5.25 bp, we are not able to accurately fit
the unzipping data (Supplementary Figure S3). We can
thus directly read off the spacing of the steps from the
positions of the peaks in the unzipping data (7). This
results in slight variations of the step spacing around
the average of 5.25 bp consistent with the nucleosome
crystal structure, which shows that DNA contacts in
the nucleosome are not evenly spaced (2) either. We use
discrete steps for simplicity, as we find no significant
difference from using more gradual steps. Lastly,
the landscape cuts off shortly after the dyad region,
such that the histone octamer irreversibly dissociates
from the DNA and cannot bind again once the system
reaches this cut off. This corresponds with the observation
that nucleosomes disassemble after the dyad is
disrupted (7,18).
The free energy landscape is varied until the calculated
DNA unzipping dynamics (dashed line, Figure 1B)
agree with the experimental data. The free energy landscape
shown (Figure 1C) conforms to all the constraints
outlined above and also accurately reproduces the
measured unzipping dynamics. Thus, we are able to
extract detailed information about the structure of the
nucleosome free energy landscape from these studies.
Because we do not know the value of , the landscape is
not completely constrained by the unzipping experiments.
By making relatively small adjustments to the value of ,
we can obtain free energy landscapes that fit the unzipping
data about as well as the one shown (Figure 1C), but that
have total height as small as 12 kBT or as large as 27 kBT.
We select a landscape with total height of 23:8 kBT as
this allows us to simultaneously fit measurements of
nucleosome dissasembly by hMSH2-hMSH6 described in
the next section.
Nucleosome disassembly by hMSH2-hMSH6
To demonstrate the utility of our nucleosome free energy
landscape, we apply it to measurements of the rate of
nucleosome disassembly induced by the DNA mismatch
recognition complex, hMSH2-hMSH6 (10,11). In these
experiments, one end of a duplex DNA molecule is
labeled with biotin, while the other end contains a nucleosome
positioning sequence wrapped into a nucleosome
(Figure 2A). The DNA molecule contains 99 or 75 base
pairs between the biotin and the 5S or 601 positioning
sequence, respectively, and a mismatch 21 base pairs
from the biotin labeled end. hMSH2-hMSH6 binds the
DNA mismatch and following ATP binding forms a
clamp that slides freely along the DNA (9,19).
Streptavidin bound to the biotin labeled end of the
DNA prevents hMSH2-hMSH6 from sliding off that
DNA end. At the opposite end, hMSH2-hMSH6 disassembles
the nucleosome, allowing for hMSH2-hMSH6
to slide off the DNA.
4 Nucleic Acids Research, 2011
Downloaded from nar.oxfordjournals.org by guest on July 21, 2011
Nucleosome disassembly by hMSH2-hMSH6 was
demonstrated to depend on ATP binding but not ATP
hydrolysis (10). We therefore consider a model where no
ATP is hydrolyzed and hMSH2-hMSH6 cannot directly
exert a force on the nucleosome. Rather, hMSH2-hMSH6
takes advantage of fluctuations in nucleosomal DNA
unwrapping (3,5,20), which we calculate from our
calibrated free energy landscape. hMSH2-hMSH6 binds
at the DNA mismatch, forms a sliding clamp and then
freely diffuses along the DNA. An additional hMSH2-
hMSH6 complex can bind at the mismatch and form
a sliding clamp once hMSH2-hMSH6 diffuses off the
mismatch. As multiple hMSH2-hMSH6 clamps load
onto the DNA, they can occupy unwrapped nucleosomal
DNA, which prevents rewrapping thereby increasing the
fraction of unwrapped nucleosomal DNA.
To accurately model hMSH2-hMSH6, we use known
rates of hMSH2-hMSH6 sliding and binding. A rate of
5 per minute was used for hMSH2-hMSH6 binding and
sliding clamp formation at a G/T mismatch, while 0.1 per
minute was used for the rate of dissociation of the sliding
clamp form of hMSH2-hMSH6 from DNA (8,19,21,22).
A rate of 3:7  107 base pairs per minute was used for the
step rate of hMSH2-hMSH6 clamps. This corresponds to
the reported lower limit for the hMSH2-hMSH6 clamp
diffusion constant on duplex DNA of 0:036 mm2/s (21).
We calculated rates of hMSH2-hMSH6 induced nucleosome
disassembly for comparison to rates measured by
electrophoretic mobility shift assays (10,11). For computational
efficiency, we used the fact that hMSH2-hMSH6
stepping along the DNA is the fastest process in our
model, which allows us to model hMSH2-hMSH6
clamps as an equilibrated gas (14). This gas consists of
particles of size  ¼ 25nm (8), which diffuse freely in
one dimension along the DNA, but cannot pass through
one another (Figure 2A) (see ‘Materials and Methods’
section). We find the calculated nucleosome disassembly
rates using this approximation to be nearly identical to
those from a full simulation including every hMSH2-
hMSH6 complex explicitly (Supplementary Figure S1).
DNA sequence dependence of nucleosome disassembly
by hMSH2-hMSH6
We begin by examining nucleosome disassembly measurements
with the 601 positioning sequence. This allows us to
employ the same free energy landscape used to model
unzipping experiments (solid line, Figure 2B). We calculate
the characteristic time for nucleosome disassembly
to be 970 min, which agrees with the experimental observation
that hMSH2-hMSH6 does not measurably disassemble
nucleosomes in 60 min (diamonds, Figure 2D)
(11,23).
Figure 2. Model predictions compared with experimental measurements
for nucleosome displacement by hMSH2-hMSH6. (A)
Graphical depiction of the experimental system [10]. Streptavidin
bound to the biotinylated left end of the DNA prevents hMSH2-
hMSH6 (MSH) from sliding off this end, while a nucleosome inhibits
hMSH2-hMSH6 from sliding off the right end of the DNA. There is
a mismatch located nM ¼ 21 bp from the biotin bead, at which
hMSH2-hMSH6 may bind. The total length of the DNA segment is
L. The hMSH2-hMSH6 is confined to length l, the DNA between the
biotin bead and the nucleosome. The footprint of one hMSH2-hMSH6
molecule is  ¼ 25 bp. Free energy landscapes for unwrapping nucleosomes
on (B) the 601 positioning sequence and (C) the 5S positioning
Figure 2. Continued
sequence. Numerical values for these energy landscapes are provided as
a supplemental spreadsheet. A comparison of the results of our
modeling (lines) using these energy landscapes to experimental measurements
(points) of nucleosome displacement by hMSH2-hMSH6
shows excellent agreement for both (D) the 601 positioning sequence
and (E) the Xenopus 5S positioning sequence.
Nucleic Acids Research, 2011 5
Downloaded from nar.oxfordjournals.org by guest on July 21, 2011
Next, we consider the influence of the 5S nucleosome
positioning sequence on nucleosome disassembly by
hMSH2-hMSH6. We assume that the change in DNA
sequence only influences the free energy landscape of nucleosome
unwrapping. Therefore, we kept all model parameters
fixed except for the nucleosome unwrapping free
energy landscape. While detailed DNA unzipping measurements
have not been reported for a 5S sequence, we
expect this landscape to have the same general form as the
601 landscape, but a smaller total height. The sea urchin
5S sequence lowers the free energy of nucleosome formation
by 4.7 kBT relative to 601 (15) and thus we expect a
reduction of several kBT for the Xenopus 5S sequence as
well (10). Furthermore, the DNA sequence near the dyad
region appears to be responsible for the enhanced DNA–
histone binding of the 601 sequence (4,15).
We modified the 601 landscape by decreasing it by
a total of 2.2 kBT in the dyad region (solid line,
Figure 2C). Nucleosome disassembly by hMSH2-
hMSH6 is not sensitve to the detailed structure of the
free energy landscape, so our choice to modify the landscape
at the dyad region is based on empirical evidence
that the increased binding affinity of the 601 sequence
relative to 5S is due mainly to contacts in the dyad
region (4,15). This landscape gives a good fit to the experimental
data for unmodified nucleosomes containing
the Xenopus 5S sequence (10) (diamonds, Figure 2E).
This landscape allowed us to explain the behavior of nucleosome
disassembly in the absence of a mismatch
(squares, Figure 2E) where hMSH2-hMSH6 is permitted
to bind at any position within the DNA at a rate of
9  104 per minute, the experimental rate of hMSH2-
hMSH6 binding to duplex DNA without a mismatch
(8,19,22). These results suggest that modest changes
in the free energy landscape due to alterations in the
nucleosomal DNA sequence can lead to significant
changes in the hMSH2-hMSH6 induced nucleosome
disassembly rate.
The influence of histone post-translational modifications
of nucleosome disassembly by hMSH2-hMSH6
Histone PTMs within the DNA–histone interface reduce
the free energy of nucleosome formation (11,12,24,25) and
facilitate nucleosome disassembly by hMSH2-hMSH6
(10,11). We incorporated the influence of histone PTMs
into our model by assuming that they specifically influence
the DNA unwrapping free energy landscape close to the
location of the PTM.
We first investigated the influence of histone PTMs near
the nucleosome dyad: the phosphorylation of histone H3
at T118 [H3(T118ph)] and the double acetylation of H3 at
K115 and K122 [H3(K115ac,K122ac)]. These modifications
occur in vivo (26) and influence DNA repair (27).
Recently, it was reported that H3(T118ph) reduces the
DNA–histone binding free energy by 3:50.3 kBT and
that it increases the rate of hMSH2-hMSH6 induced nucleosome
disassembly by 25 times (11). We found that
a 3.8 kBT reduction of our 601 free energy landscape
in the dyad region results in excellent agreement between
the model predictions and the measured data (squares,
Figure 2D).
The dyad acetylations, H3(K115ac,K122ac), reduce the
DNA–histone binding free energy by 0:8  0:4 kBT (12)
and increase the rate of nucleosome disassembly by
hMSH2-hMSH6 (10). We found that decreasing the free
energy landscape for unmodified 5S by 1.2 kBT in the dyad
region fits the experimental measurements for these modifications
(circles, Figure 2E).
Histone acetylation in the DNA entry–exit region of the
nucleosome, H3(K56ac), reduces the free energy of the
nucleosome binding to DNA (24) and increases DNA
unwrapping (25). From this increase in unwrapping, we
estimate that H3(K56ac) reduces the binding free energy
by 0:5  0:3 kBT (25). This modification occurs within
newly replicated DNA and appears important for DNA
repair (6). Furthermore, the acetyllysine mimic at this
location, H3(K56Q), enhances the rate of nucleosome disassembly
by hMSH2-hMSH6 (10). We incorporated
H3(K56Q) into our model by reducing the energy landscape
by 0.5 kBT in the entry–exit region compared to the
unmodified 5S landscape (dashed line, Figure 2C). This
results in an excellent fit to the hMSH2-hMSH6 displacement
data for H3(K56Q) (triangles, Figure 2E).
Finally, using the energy landscapes described above,
we reproduce the disassembly rates without a mismatch
for H3(T118ph) (inverted triangles, Figure 2D) and
H3(K115ac,K122ac) 5S nucleosomes (inverted triangles,
Figure 2E). We use the same hMSH2-hMSH6 binding
conditions used to describe unmodified nucleosomes
with no mismatch on 601, i.e. without fitting any other
parameters. As before, measurements without mismatches
were modeled by allowing hMSH2-hMSH6 to bind at any
position within the DNA.
DISCUSSION
To our knowledge, we propose the first detailed quantitative
free energy landscape for unwrapping DNA from a
histone octamer. We develop this landscape from high
resolution nucleosomal DNA unzipping experiments (7).
We then demonstrate that this landscape accounts for the
different hMSH2-hMSH6 induced nucleosome disassembly
rates for two separate DNA sequences and four
separate histone modification states. All parameters are
held constant except for the free energy landscape. To
model modifications and DNA sequence differences we
only introduce modest landscape alterations located
in the regions of the landscape associated with the
modification or sequence difference. The magnitudes of
these alterations are consistent (Table 1) with changes
in DNA–histone binding free energies known from experiments
(11,12,15,25). These results demonstrate that the
nucleosome unwrapping free energy landscape provides
an important tool for understanding enzyme provoked
nucleosome disassembly.
The model’s success in explaining numerous experimental
results indicates that it captures the essential components
of nucleosome disassembly by hMSH2-hMSH6
and that we can use the model to provide mechanistic
6 Nucleic Acids Research, 2011
Downloaded from nar.oxfordjournals.org by guest on July 21, 2011
insight into this disassembly process. The observation that
multiple hMSH2-hMSH6 clamps loaded onto DNA
behave as a 1D gas, also known as a Tonks gas (14),
provides a mechanistic picture of hMSH2-hMSH6
induced nucleosome disassembly. The hMSH2-hMSH6
Tonks gas exerts a 1D pressure on the nucleosome
(Supplementary Figure S4). The pressure builds as additional
hMSH2-hMSH6 complexes load onto the DNA,
which shifts the equilibrium amount of DNA wrapped
into the nucleosome toward more unwrapped states.
This enables the nucleosome to eventually reach an
unwrapped state that allows for histone octamer
disassociation.
The number of hMSH2-hMSH6 clamps required to disassemble
the nucleosome is three to four (Figure 3 and
Supplementary Figure S5). However, this number of
clamps is not sufficient to trap DNA unwrapping states
out to the dyad. Instead, the plateau in the free energy
landscape around 50 bp allows clamps to trap states with
about 50 bp of unwrapped DNA often enough that an
unwrapping fluctuation to the dyad occurs before the
outermost clamp slides away from the nucleosome
(Supplementary Figure S6).
The model indicates that the mechanism by which dyad
modifications, H3(T118ph) and H3(K115ac,K122ac)
influence nucleosome disassembly is distinct from the
DNA entry–exit modification mimic, H3(K56Q). None
of the modifications influence the distance the outermost
hMSH2-hMSH6 clamp invades into the nucleosome.
The dyad modifications increase the probability for an
unwrapping fluctuation that allows for histone octamer
release when the outermost hMSH2-hMSh6 clamp
has trapped about 50 bp of DNA (Supplementary
Figure S6). In contrast, H3(K56Q) increases the probability
that hMSH2-hMSH6 has trapped an unwrapping fluctuation
of about 50 bp. This increases the time period the
nucleosome exists in a partially unwrapped state and in
turn the probability that the nucleosome will unwrap to
the dyad and release the histone octamer. These mechanistic
insights elucidate how fractional changes in the nucleosome
unwrapping free energy landscape result in order
of magnitude changes in the rate of disassembly.
The time for nucleosome disassembly varies from
about 40 min to 16 h. Yet, all the processes involved
with disassembly, including nucleosome unwrapping,
hMSH2-hMSH6 sliding, and hMSH2-hMSH6 binding,
are significantly faster. Our model explains this apparent
discrepancy. The first and second hMSH2-hMSH6 clamps
load on the scale of minutes. However, to load a third
clamp, both loaded hMSH2-hMSH6 clamps must simultaneously
move toward the nucleosome to provide enough
space for the third hMSH2-hMSH6 clamp. This is
strongly disfavored by entropy. Loading even larger
numbers of hMSH2-hMSH6 clamps requires the coordination
of nucleosome unwrapping with simultaneous
sliding of multiple clamps, which is further disfavored by
entropy. As a consequence, the number of hMSH2-
hMSH6 clamps required for disassembly is three to four
and the rates for loading the fourth clamp are similar to
the rates for nucleosome displacement (Supplementary
Figure S7). We conclude that the binding of multiple
hMSH2-hMSH6 clamps is the rate-limiting step in
nucleosome displacement.
Our model not only quantitatively explains recent experiments
by Javaid et al. (10) and North et al. (11), but
also explains the apparently contradictory studies that
report nucleosomes are a barrier to hMSH2-hMSH6
sliding (23,28). The studies by Li et al. (23) observed no
nucleosome disassembly by hMSH2-hMSH6. While their
construct was similar to studies by Javaid et al. and North
et al., Li et al. only used the 601 positioning sequence
and unmodified histone octamers. As discussed above,
we find that the 601 sequence largely prevents disassembly
by hMSH2-hMSH6 with unmodified histone octamer,
which was confirmed by North et al. (11). Gorman et al.
(28) reported that nucleosomes create a boundary to yeast
MSH2-MSH6 diffusion. Their experiments involve single
molecule tracking of quantum dot labeled MSH2-MSH6
clamps on lambda DNA that contains nucleosomes but no
mismatch. They track MSH2-MSH6 along the DNA after
washing out free MSH2-MSH6. Because there is no
mismatch and no additional MSH2-MSH6 to load onto
the DNA, multiple MSH2-MSH6 clamps cannot be
loaded onto the DNA between two nucleosomes. Thus,
under the experimental conditions used by Gorman
et al., the pressure of the 1D gas cannot reach the values
required to disassemble a nucleosome and the nucleosome
becomes a barrier to the sliding of a single MSH2-MSH6
clamp as they report.
The successful application of our nucleosome
unwrapping free energy landscape indicates that it will
Figure 3. Distribution of the number of bound hMSH2-hMSH6 complexes
needed to displace nucleosomes from the 601 positioning
sequence. The solid line shows the result for unmodified nucleosomes,
and the dashed line for the dyad modification H3(T118ph).
Table 1. Binding energy for modified nucleosomes relative to
wild-type nucleosomes
Sequence Modification Eexpt
a Elandscape
b
ðkBTÞ ðkBTÞ
601 H3(T118ph) 3:5  0:3 3.8
5S H3(K56Q) 0:5  0:3 0.5
5S H3(K115ac,K122ac) 0:8  0:4 1.2
aExperimentally measured binding energies [11,12,25].
bBinding energies determined from our free energy landscapes.
Nucleic Acids Research, 2011 7
Downloaded from nar.oxfordjournals.org by guest on July 21, 2011
prove useful for modeling a wide variety of experiments
involving nucleosome unwrapping, and many different
interactions between DNA binding proteins and nucleosomes
in vivo. In particular, when a protein does not
interact specifically with either the DNA or the nucleosome,
as is the case with hMSH2-hMSH6, our free
energy landscape completely describes the dynamics of
the system. Even when this is not the case, the landscape
should prove an invaluable tool. The model will facilitate
the separation of the DNA–histone binding from additional
interactions. This in turn will allow for determination
of interactions between the nucleosome and other
protein complexes, such as chromatin remodelers that disassemble,
reposition and unwrap nucleosomes.
FUNDING
National Science Foundation (under grant No. DMR-
0706002 to R.B.); Burroughs Wellcome Career Award in
the Basic Biomedical Sciences (to M.G.P.); the NIH
GM083055 (to M.G.P.); the NIH CA067007 and
GM080176 (to R.F.), and an American Heart Association
Predoctoral Fellowship 0815460D (to J.A.N.). Funding
for open access charge: National Science Foundation
(grant No. DMR-0706002 to R.B.).
Conflict of interest statement. None declared.
REFERENCES
1. Van Holde,K. (1989) Chromatin. Elsevier, Amsterdam,
The Netherlands.
2. Luger,K., Maeder,A.W., Richmond,R.K., Sargent,D.F. and
Richmond,T.J. (1997) Crystal structure of the nucleosome core
particle at 2.8A ˚ resolution. Nature, 389, 251.
3. Polach,K.J. and Widom,J. (1995) Mechanism of protein access
to specific DNA sequences in chromatin: a dynamic equilibrium
model for gene regulation. J. Mol. Biol., 254, 130–149.
4. Tha˚ stro¨ m,A., Bingham,L.M. and Widom,J. (2004) Nucleosomal
locations of dominant DNA sequence motifs for histone–DNA
interactions and nucleosome positioning. J. Mol. Biol., 338,
695–709.
5. Anderson,J.D. and Widom,J. (2000) Sequence and
position-dependence of the equilibrium accessibility of
nucleosomal DNA target sites. J. Mol. Biol., 296, 979–987.
6. Ransom,M., Dennehey,B. and Tyler,J. (2010) Chaperoning
histones during DNA replication and repair. Cell, 140, 183–195.
7. Hall,M.A., Shundrovsky,A., Bai,L., Fulbright,R.M., Lis,J.T. and
Wang,M.D. (2009) High-resolution dynamic mapping of
histone-DNA interactions in a nucleosome. Nat. Struct. Mol.
Biol., 16, 124–129.
8. Gradia,S., Acharya,S. and Fishel,R. (1997) The human
mismatch recognition complex hMSH2-hMSH6 functions as a
novel molecular switch. Cell, 91, 995–1005.
9. Gradia,S., Subramanian,D., Wilson,T., Acharya,S., Makhov,A.,
Griffith,J. and Fishel,R. (1999) hMSH2–hMSH6 forms a
hydrolysis-independent sliding clamp on mismatched DNA.
Mol. Cell, 3, 255–261.
10. Javaid,S., Manohar,M., Punja,N., Mooney,A., Ottesen,J.J.,
Poirier,M.G. and Fishel,R. (2009) Nucleosome remodeling by
hMSH2-hMSH6. Mol. Cell, 36, 1086–1094.
11. North,J.A., Javaid,S., Ferdinand,M., Chatterjee,N., Picking,J.W.,
Shoffner,M., Nakkula,R.J., Bartholomew,B., Ottesen,J.J.,
Fishel,R. et al. (2011) Phophorylation of histone H3(T118)
alters nucleosome dynamics and remodeling. Nucleic Acids Res.,
doi:10.1093/nar/gkr304.
12. Manohar,M., Mooney,A.M., North,J.A., Nakkula,R.J.,
Picking,J.W., Edon,A., Fishel,R., Poirier,M.G. and Ottesen,J.J.
(2009) Acetylation of histone H3 at the nucleosome
dyad alters DNA-histone binding. J. Biol. Chem., 284,
23312–23321.
13. Eaton,J.W. (2002) GNU Octave Manual, Network Theory Limited,
UK.
14. Tonks,L. (1936) The complete equation of state of one, two and
three-dimensional gases of hard elastic spheres. Phys. Rev., 50,
955–963.
15. Lowary,P.T. and Widom,J. (1998) New DNA sequence rules for
high affinity binding to histone octamer and sequence-directed
nucleosome positioning. J. Mol. Biol., 276, 19–42.
16. Habib,F. and Bundschuh,R. (2005) Modeling DNA unzipping in
the presence of bound proteins. Phys. Rev. E, 72, 031906.
17. Ranjith,P., Yan,J. and Marko,J.F. (2007) Nucleosome hopping
and sliding kinetics determined from dynamics of single
chromatin fibers in Xenopus egg extracts. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
USA, 104, 13649–13654.
18. Shundrovsky,A., Smith,C.L., Lis,J.T., Peterson,C.L. and
Wang,M.D. (2006) Probing SWI/SNF remodeling of the
nucleosome by unzipping single DNA molecules. Nat Struct
Mol Biol, 13, 549–54.
19. Fishel,R. (1998) Mismatch repair, molecular switches, and
signal transduction. Gene. Dev., 12, 2096–2101.
20. Li,G. and Widom,J. (2004) Nucleosomes facilitate their own
invasion. Nat. Struct. Mol. Biol., 11, 763–9.
21. Jeong,C., Cho,W.-K., Song,K.-M., Cook,C., Yoon,T.-Y., Ban,C.,
Fishel,R. and Lee,J.-B. (2011) MutS switches between two
fundamentally distinct clamps during mismatch repair. Nat.
Struct. Mol. Biol., 18, 379–385.
22. Gradia,S., Acharya,S. and Fishel,R. (2000) The role of
mismatched nucleotides in activating the hMSH2-hMSH6
molecular switch. J. Biol. Chem., 275, 3922–3930.
23. Li,F., Tian,L., Gu,L. and Li,G.-M. (2009) Evidence that
nucleosomes inhibit mismatch repair in eukaryotic cells.
J. Biol. Chem., 284, 33056–33061.
24. Andrews,A.J., Chen,X., Zevin,A., Stargell,L.A. and Luger,K.
(2010) The histone chaperone Nap1 promotes nucleosome
assembly by eliminating nonnucleosomal histone DNA
interactions. Mol. Cell, 37, 834–842.
25. Neumann,H., Hancock,S.M., Buning,R., Routh,A., Chapman,L.,
Somers,J., Owen-Hughes,T., van Noort,J., Rhodes,D. and
Chin,J.W. (2009) A method for genetically installing site-specific
acetylation in recombinant histones defines the effects of H3 K56
acetylation. Mol. Cell, 36, 153–163.
26. Zhang,L., Eugeni,E., Parthun,M. and Freitas,M. (2003)
Identification of novel histone post-translational modifications
by peptide mass fingerprinting. Chromosoma, 112, 77–86.
27. Hyland,E., Cosgrove,M., Molina,H., Wang,D., Pandey,A.,
Cottee,R. and Boeke,J. (2005) Insights into the role of histone
H3 and histone H4 core modifiable residues in Saccharomyces
cerevisiae. Mol. Cell. Biol., 25, 10060.
28. Gorman,J., Plys,A.J., Visnapuu,M.-L., Alani,E. and Greene,E.C.
(2010) Visualizing one-dimensional diffusion of eukaryotic DNA
repair factors along a chromatin lattice. Nat. Struct. Mol. Biol.,
17, 932–8.
8 Nucleic Acids Research, 2011
Downloaded from nar.oxfordjournals.org by guest on July 21, 2011

Reference metadata extraction using a hierarchical knowledge
representation framework
Min-Yuh Day a,b, Richard Tzong-Han Tsai a, Cheng-Lung Sung a,
Chiu-Chen Hsieh a, Cheng-Wei Lee a, Shih-Hung Wu c, Kun-Pin Wu a,
Chorng-Shyong Ong b, Wen-Lian Hsu a,⁎
a Institute of Information Science, Academia Sinica, Nankang, Taipei 115, Taiwan, ROC
b Department of Information Management, National Taiwan University, Taipei 106, Taiwan, ROC
c Department of CSIE, Chaoyang University of Technology, Taichung County 413, Taiwan, ROC
Received 13 January 2005; received in revised form 31 July 2006; accepted 10 August 2006
Available online 28 September 2006
Abstract
The integration of bibliographical information on scholarly publications available on the Internet is an important task in the
academic community. Accurate reference metadata extraction from such publications is essential for the integration of metadata
from heterogeneous reference sources. In this paper, we propose a hierarchical template-based reference metadata extraction
method for scholarly publications. We adopt a hierarchical knowledge representation framework called INFOMAP, which
automatically extracts metadata. The experimental results show that, by using INFOMAP, we can extract author, title, journal,
volume, number (issue), year, and page information from different kinds of reference styles with a high degree of precision. The
overall average accuracy is 92.39% for the six major reference styles compared in this study.
© 2006 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
Keywords: Reference extraction; Metadata extraction; Knowledge representation framework; INFOMAP
1. Introduction
The integration of bibliographical information on
scholarly publications available on the Internet is an
important task in the academic community. Accurate
reference metadata extraction from such publications is
essential for the integration of metadata from heterogeneous
reference sources, where metadata is defined as
structured data about data [5,18,22]. In this paper,
reference metadata refers to the sub-fields of references
or citations.
Automatic citation extraction is an extremely challenging
task due to variations in the use of field
separators. For example, the author and title fields can
be separated by spaces or periods, while the volume and
issue fields can be separated by braces or parentheses
[3]. Meanwhile, within fields, other separator issues
arise because of punctuation and spacing differences. To
Decision Support Systems 43 (2007) 152–167
www.elsevier.com/locate/dss
⁎ Corresponding author. Tel.: +886 2 27883799x1804; fax: +886 2
27824814.
E-mail addresses: myday@iis.sinica.edu.tw (M.-Y. Day),
thsai@iis.sinica.edu.tw (R.T.-H. Tsai), clsung@iis.sinica.edu.tw
(C.-L. Sung), gladys@iis.sinica.edu.tw (C.-C. Hsieh),
aska@iis.sinica.edu.tw (C.-W. Lee), shwu@cyut.edu.tw (S.-H. Wu),
kpw@iis.sinica.edu.tw (K.-P.Wu), ongcs@im.ntu.edu.tw (C.-S. Ong),
hsu@iis.sinica.edu.tw (W.-L. Hsu).
0167-9236/$ - see front matter © 2006 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.dss.2006.08.006

Transformer
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
This article is about the electrical device. For the media and toy franchise, see Transformers. For other uses, see Transformer (disambiguation).
This is a good article. Click here for more information.
Pole-mounted distribution transformer with center-tapped secondary winding used to provide 'split-phase' power for residential and light commercial service, which in North America is typically rated 120/240 V.[1][2]

A transformer is an electrical device that transfers energy between two or more circuits through electromagnetic induction.

A varying current in the transformer's primary winding creates a varying magnetic flux in the core and a varying magnetic field impinging on the secondary winding. This varying magnetic field at the secondary induces a varying electromotive force (EMF) or voltage in the secondary winding. Making use of Faraday's Law in conjunction with high magnetic permeability core properties, transformers can thus be designed to efficiently change AC voltages from one voltage level to another within power networks.

Transformers range in size from RF transformers less than a cubic centimetre in volume to units interconnecting the power grid weighing hundreds of tons. A wide range of transformer designs is encountered in electronic and electric power applications. Since the invention in 1885 of the first constant potential transformer, transformers have become essential for the AC transmission, distribution, and utilization of electrical energy.[3]
Contents

    1 Basic principles
        1.1 Ideal transformer
        1.2 Real transformer
    2 Basic transformer parameters and construction
        2.1 Effect of frequency
        2.2 Energy losses
        2.3 Core form and shell form transformers
    3 Construction
        3.1 Cores
        3.2 Windings
        3.3 Cooling
        3.4 Insulation drying
        3.5 Bushings
    4 Classification parameters
    5 Types
    6 Applications
    7 History
        7.1 Discovery of induction
        7.2 Induction coils
        7.3 First alternating current transformers
        7.4 Early series circuit transformer distribution
        7.5 Closed-core transformers and parallel power distribution
        7.6 Other early transformers
    8 See also
    9 Notes
    10 References
    11 Bibliography
    12 External links

Basic principles
Ideal transformer

Ideal transformer equations (eq.)

By Faraday's law of induction

V_\text{S} = -N_\text{S} \frac{\mathrm{d}\Phi}{\mathrm{d}t} . . . (1)[a]

V_\text{P} = -N_\text{P} \frac{\mathrm{d}\Phi}{\mathrm{d}t} . . . (2)

Combining ratio of (1) & (2)

Turns ratio =\frac{V_\text{P}}{V_\text{S}} = \frac{-N_\text{P}}{-N_\text{S}}=a . . . (3) where

    for step-down transformers, a > 1
    for step-up transformers, a < 1

By law of Conservation of Energy, apparent, real and reactive power are each conserved in the input and output

S=I_\text{P} V_\text{P} = I_\text{S} V_\text{S} . . . (4)

Combining (3) & (4) with this endnote[b] yields the ideal transformer identity

\frac{V_\text{P}}{V_\text{S}} = \frac{I_\text{S}}{I_\text{P}}=\frac{N_\text{P}}{N_\text{S}}=\sqrt{\frac{L_\text{P}}{L_\text{S}}}=a . (5)

By Ohm's Law and ideal transformer identity

Z_\text{L}=\frac{V_\text{S}}{I_\text{S}} . . . (6)

Apparent load impedance Z'L (ZL referred to the primary)

Z'_\text{L} = \frac{V_\text{P}}{I_\text{P}}=\frac{aV_\text{S}}{I_\text{S}/a}=a^2\frac{V_\text{S}}{I_\text{S}}=a^2{Z_\text{L}} . (7)

It is very common, for simplification or approximation purposes, to analyze the transformer as an ideal transformer model as represented in the two images. An ideal transformer is a theoretical, linear transformer that is lossless and perfectly coupled; that is, there are no energy losses and flux is completely confined within the magnetic core. Perfect coupling implies infinitely high core magnetic permeability and winding inductances and zero net magnetomotive force.[5][c]
Ideal transformer connected with source VP on primary and load impedance ZL on secondary, where 0 < ZL < ∞.

A varying current in the transformer's primary winding creates a varying magnetic flux in the core and a varying magnetic field impinging on the secondary winding. This varying magnetic field at the secondary induces a varying electromotive force (EMF) or voltage in the secondary winding. The primary and secondary windings are wrapped around a core of infinitely high magnetic permeability[d] so that all of the magnetic flux passes through both the primary and secondary windings. With a voltage source connected to the primary winding and load impedance connected to the secondary winding, the transformer currents flow in the indicated directions. (See also Polarity.)
Ideal transformer and induction law[e]

According to Faraday's law of induction, since the same magnetic flux passes through both the primary and secondary windings in an ideal transformer,[7] a voltage is induced in each winding, according to eq. (1) in the secondary winding case, according to eq. (2) in the primary winding case.[8] The primary EMF is sometimes termed counter EMF.[9][10][f] This is in accordance with Lenz's law, which states that induction of EMF always opposes development of any such change in magnetic field.

The transformer winding voltage ratio is thus shown to be directly proportional to the winding turns ratio according to eq. (3).[11][12][g][h]

According to the law of Conservation of Energy, any load impedance connected to the ideal transformer's secondary winding results in conservation of apparent, real and reactive power consistent with eq. (4).
Instrument transformer, with polarity dot and X1 markings on LV side terminal

The ideal transformer identity shown in eq. (5) is a reasonable approximation for the typical commercial transformer, with voltage ratio and winding turns ratio both being inversely proportional to the corresponding current ratio.

By Ohm's Law and the ideal transformer identity:

    the secondary circuit load impedance can be expressed as eq. (6)
    the apparent load impedance referred to the primary circuit is derived in eq. (7) to be equal to the turns ratio squared times the secondary circuit load impedance.[15][16]

Polarity

A dot convention is often used in transformer circuit diagrams, nameplates or terminal markings to define the relative polarity of transformer windings. Positively-increasing instantaneous current entering the primary winding's dot end induces positive polarity voltage at the secondary winding's dot end.[17][18][19][i][j][k]
Real transformer
Deviations from ideal

The ideal transformer model neglects the following basic linear aspects in real transformers.

Core losses, collectively called magnetizing current losses, consist of[23]

    Hysteresis losses due to nonlinear application of the voltage applied in the transformer core, and
    Eddy current losses due to joule heating in the core that are proportional to the square of the transformer's applied voltage.

Whereas windings in the ideal model have no resistances and infinite inductances, the windings in a real transformer have finite non-zero resistances and inductances associated with:

    Joule losses due to resistance in the primary and secondary windings[23]
    Leakage flux that escapes from the core and passes through one winding only resulting in primary and secondary reactive impedance.

Leakage flux of a transformer
Leakage flux
Main article: Leakage inductance

The ideal transformer model assumes that all flux generated by the primary winding links all the turns of every winding, including itself. In practice, some flux traverses paths that take it outside the windings.[24] Such flux is termed leakage flux, and results in leakage inductance in series with the mutually coupled transformer windings.[10] Leakage flux results in energy being alternately stored in and discharged from the magnetic fields with each cycle of the power supply. It is not directly a power loss, but results in inferior voltage regulation, causing the secondary voltage not to be directly proportional to the primary voltage, particularly under heavy load.[24] Transformers are therefore normally designed to have very low leakage inductance.

In some applications increased leakage is desired, and long magnetic paths, air gaps, or magnetic bypass shunts may deliberately be introduced in a transformer design to limit the short-circuit current it will supply.[10] Leaky transformers may be used to supply loads that exhibit negative resistance, such as electric arcs, mercury vapor lamps, and neon signs or for safely handling loads that become periodically short-circuited such as electric arc welders.[25]

Air gaps are also used to keep a transformer from saturating, especially audio-frequency transformers in circuits that have a DC component flowing in the windings.[26]

Knowledge of leakage inductance is also useful when transformers are operated in parallel. It can be shown that if the percent impedance[l] and associated winding leakage reactance-to-resistance (X/R) ratio of two transformers were hypothetically exactly the same, the transformers would share power in proportion to their respective volt-ampere ratings (e.g. 500 kVA unit in parallel with 1,000 kVA unit, the larger unit would carry twice the current). However, the impedance tolerances of commercial transformers are significant. Also, the Z impedance and X/R ratio of different capacity transformers tends to vary, corresponding 1,000 kVA and 500 kVA units' values being, to illustrate, respectively, Z ~ 5.75%, X/R ~ 3.75 and Z ~ 5%, X/R ~ 4.75.[28][29]
Equivalent circuit
See also: Steinmetz equivalent circuit

Referring to the diagram, a practical transformer's physical behavior may be represented by an equivalent circuit model, which can incorporate an ideal transformer.[30]

Winding joule losses and leakage reactances are represented by the following series loop impedances of the model:

    Primary winding: RP, XP
    Secondary winding: RS, XS.

In normal course of circuit equivalence transformation, RS and XS are in practice usually referred to the primary side by multiplying these impedances by the turns ratio squared, (NP/NS) 2 = a2.
Real transformer equivalent circuit

Core loss and reactance is represented by the following shunt leg impedances of the model:

    Core or iron losses: RC
    Magnetizing reactance: XM.

RC and XM are collectively termed the magnetizing branch of the model.

Core losses are caused mostly by hysteresis and eddy current effects in the core and are proportional to the square of the core flux for operation at a given frequency.[31] The finite permeability core requires a magnetizing current IM to maintain mutual flux in the core. Magnetizing current is in phase with the flux, the relationship between the two being non-linear due to saturation effects. However, all impedances of the equivalent circuit shown are by definition linear and such non-linearity effects are not typically reflected in transformer equivalent circuits.[31] With sinusoidal supply, core flux lags the induced EMF by 90°. With open-circuited secondary winding, magnetizing branch current I0 equals transformer no-load current.[30]

The resulting model, though sometimes termed 'exact' equivalent circuit based on linearity assumptions, retains a number of approximations.[30] Analysis may be simplified by assuming that magnetizing branch impedance is relatively high and relocating the branch to the left of the primary impedances. This introduces error but allows combination of primary and referred secondary resistances and reactances by simple summation as two series impedances.

Transformer equivalent circuit impedance and transformer ratio parameters can be derived from the following tests: open-circuit test,[m] short-circuit test, winding resistance test, and transformer ratio test.
Basic transformer parameters and construction
Power transformer over-excitation condition caused by decreased frequency; flux (green), iron core's magnetic characteristics (red) and magnetizing current (blue).
Effect of frequency

Transformer universal EMF equation

If the flux in the core is purely sinusoidal, the relationship for either winding between its rms voltage Erms of the winding, and the supply frequency f, number of turns N, core cross-sectional area a in m2 and peak magnetic flux density Bpeak in Wb/m2 or T (tesla) is given by the universal EMF equation:[23]

E_\text{rms} = {\frac {2 \pi f N a B_\text{peak}} {\sqrt{2}}} \approx 4.44 f N a B_\text{peak}

If the flux does not contain even harmonics the following equation can be used for half-cycle average voltage Eavg of any waveshape:

E_\text{avg}= 4 f N a B_\text{peak} \!

By Faraday's Law of induction shown in eq. (1) and (2), transformer EMFs vary according to the derivative of flux with respect to time.[33] The ideal transformer's core behaves linearly with time for any non-zero frequency.[6][34] Flux in a real transformer's core behaves non-linearly in relation to magnetization current as the instantaneous flux increases beyond a finite linear range resulting in magnetic saturation associated with increasingly large magnetizing current, which eventually leads to transformer overheating.

The EMF of a transformer at a given flux density increases with frequency.[23] By operating at higher frequencies, transformers can be physically more compact because a given core is able to transfer more power without reaching saturation and fewer turns are needed to achieve the same impedance. However, properties such as core loss and conductor skin effect also increase with frequency. Aircraft and military equipment employ 400 Hz power supplies which reduce core and winding weight.[35] Conversely, frequencies used for some railway electrification systems were much lower (e.g. 16.7 Hz and 25 Hz) than normal utility frequencies (50–60 Hz) for historical reasons concerned mainly with the limitations of early electric traction motors. As such, the transformers used to step-down the high over-head line voltages (e.g. 15 kV) were much heavier for the same power rating than those designed only for the higher frequencies.

Operation of a transformer at its designed voltage but at a higher frequency than intended will lead to reduced magnetizing current. At a lower frequency, the magnetizing current will increase. Operation of a transformer at other than its design frequency may require assessment of voltages, losses, and cooling to establish if safe operation is practical. For example, transformers may need to be equipped with 'volts per hertz' over-excitation relays to protect the transformer from overvoltage at higher than rated frequency.

One example is in traction transformers used for electric multiple unit and high-speed train service operating across regions with different electrical standards. The converter equipment and traction transformers have to accommodate different input frequencies and voltage (ranging from as high as 50 Hz down to 16.7 Hz and rated up to 25 kV) while being suitable for multiple AC asynchronous motor and DC converters and motors with varying harmonics mitigation filtering requirements.

Large power transformers are vulnerable to insulation failure due to transient voltages with high-frequency components, such as caused in switching or by lightning.[36]
Energy losses

Real transformer energy losses are dominated by winding resistance joule and core losses. Transformers' efficiency tends to improve with increasing transformer capacity. The efficiency of typical distribution transformers is between about 98 and 99 percent.[37][38][n]

As transformer losses vary with load, it is often useful to express these losses in terms of no-load loss, full-load loss, half-load loss, and so on. Hysteresis and eddy current losses are constant at all load levels and dominate overwhelmingly without load, while variable winding joule losses dominating increasingly as load increases. The no-load loss can be significant, so that even an idle transformer constitutes a drain on the electrical supply. Designing energy efficient transformers for lower loss requires a larger core, good-quality silicon steel, or even amorphous steel for the core and thicker wire, increasing initial cost. The choice of construction represents a trade-off between initial cost and operating cost.[40]

Transformer losses arise from:

Winding joule losses
    Current flowing through a winding's conductor causes joule heating. As frequency increases, skin effect and proximity effect causes the winding's resistance and, hence, losses to increase.
Core losses

    Hysteresis losses
        Each time the magnetic field is reversed, a small amount of energy is lost due to hysteresis within the core. According to Steinmetz's formula, the heat energy due to hysteresis is given by

            W_h\approx\eta\beta^{1.6}_{max}, and,

        hysteresis loss is thus given by

            P_h\approx{W}_hf\approx\eta{f}\beta^{1.6}_{max}

        where, f is the frequency, η is the hysteresis coefficient and βmax is the maximum flux density, the empirical exponent of which varies from about 1.4 to 1 .8 but is often given as 1.6 for iron.[40][41][42]
    Eddy current losses
        Ferromagnetic materials are also good conductors and a core made from such a material also constitutes a single short-circuited turn throughout its entire length. Eddy currents therefore circulate within the core in a plane normal to the flux, and are responsible for resistive heating of the core material. The eddy current loss is a complex function of the square of supply frequency and inverse square of the material thickness.[40] Eddy current losses can be reduced by making the core of a stack of plates electrically insulated from each other, rather than a solid block; all transformers operating at low frequencies use laminated or similar cores.

Magnetostriction related transformer hum
    Magnetic flux in a ferromagnetic material, such as the core, causes it to physically expand and contract slightly with each cycle of the magnetic field, an effect known as magnetostriction, the frictional energy of which produces an audible noise known as mains hum or transformer hum.[11][43] This transformer hum is especially objectionable in transformers supplied at power frequencies[o] and in high-frequency flyback transformers associated with PAL system CRTs.
Stray losses
    Leakage inductance is by itself largely lossless, since energy supplied to its magnetic fields is returned to the supply with the next half-cycle. However, any leakage flux that intercepts nearby conductive materials such as the transformer's support structure will give rise to eddy currents and be converted to heat.[44] There are also radiative losses due to the oscillating magnetic field but these are usually small.

    Core form = core type; shell form = shell type
    Mechanical vibration and audible noise transmission
    In addition to magnetostriction, the alternating magnetic field causes fluctuating forces between the primary and secondary windings. This energy incites vibration transmission in interconnected metalwork, thus amplifying audible transformer hum.[45]

Core form and shell form transformers

Closed-core transformers are constructed in 'core form' or 'shell form'. When windings surround the core, the transformer is core form; when windings are surrounded by the core, the transformer is shell form. Shell form design may be more prevalent than core form design for distribution transformer applications due to the relative ease in stacking the core around winding coils.[46] Core form design tends to, as a general rule, be more economical, and therefore more prevalent, than shell form design for high voltage power transformer applications at the lower end of their voltage and power rating ranges (less than or equal to, nominally, 230 kV or 75 MVA). At higher voltage and power ratings, shell form transformers tend to be more prevalent.[46][47][48][49] Shell form design tends to be preferred for extra-high voltage and higher MVA applications because, though more labor-intensive to manufacture, shell form transformers are characterized as having inherently better kVA-to-weight ratio, better short-circuit strength characteristics and higher immunity to transit damage.[49]
Construction
Cores
Laminated steel cores
Laminated core transformer showing edge of laminations at top of photo
Power transformer inrush current caused by residual flux at switching instant; flux (green), iron core's magnetic characteristics (red) and magnetizing current (blue).

Transformers for use at power or audio frequencies typically have cores made of high permeability silicon steel.[50] The steel has a permeability many times that of free space and the core thus serves to greatly reduce the magnetizing current and confine the flux to a path which closely couples the windings.[51] Early transformer developers soon realized that cores constructed from solid iron resulted in prohibitive eddy current losses, and their designs mitigated this effect with cores consisting of bundles of insulated iron wires.[52] Later designs constructed the core by stacking layers of thin steel laminations, a principle that has remained in use. Each lamination is insulated from its neighbors by a thin non-conducting layer of insulation.[53] The universal transformer equation indicates a minimum cross-sectional area for the core to avoid saturation.

The effect of laminations is to confine eddy currents to highly elliptical paths that enclose little flux, and so reduce their magnitude. Thinner laminations reduce losses,[54] but are more laborious and expensive to construct.[55] Thin laminations are generally used on high-frequency transformers, with some of very thin steel laminations able to operate up to 10 kHz.
Laminating the core greatly reduces eddy-current losses

One common design of laminated core is made from interleaved stacks of E-shaped steel sheets capped with I-shaped pieces, leading to its name of 'E-I transformer'.[55] Such a design tends to exhibit more losses, but is very economical to manufacture. The cut-core or C-core type is made by winding a steel strip around a rectangular form and then bonding the layers together. It is then cut in two, forming two C shapes, and the core assembled by binding the two C halves together with a steel strap.[55] They have the advantage that the flux is always oriented parallel to the metal grains, reducing reluctance.

A steel core's remanence means that it retains a static magnetic field when power is removed. When power is then reapplied, the residual field will cause a high inrush current until the effect of the remaining magnetism is reduced, usually after a few cycles of the applied AC waveform.[56] Overcurrent protection devices such as fuses must be selected to allow this harmless inrush to pass. On transformers connected to long, overhead power transmission lines, induced currents due to geomagnetic disturbances during solar storms can cause saturation of the core and operation of transformer protection devices.[57]

Distribution transformers can achieve low no-load losses by using cores made with low-loss high-permeability silicon steel or amorphous (non-crystalline) metal alloy. The higher initial cost of the core material is offset over the life of the transformer by its lower losses at light load.[58]
Solid cores

Powdered iron cores are used in circuits such as switch-mode power supplies that operate above mains frequencies and up to a few tens of kilohertz. These materials combine high magnetic permeability with high bulk electrical resistivity. For frequencies extending beyond the VHF band, cores made from non-conductive magnetic ceramic materials called ferrites are common.[55] Some radio-frequency transformers also have movable cores (sometimes called 'slugs') which allow adjustment of the coupling coefficient (and bandwidth) of tuned radio-frequency circuits.
Toroidal cores
Small toroidal core transformer

Toroidal transformers are built around a ring-shaped core, which, depending on operating frequency, is made from a long strip of silicon steel or permalloy wound into a coil, powdered iron, or ferrite.[59] A strip construction ensures that the grain boundaries are optimally aligned, improving the transformer's efficiency by reducing the core's reluctance. The closed ring shape eliminates air gaps inherent in the construction of an E-I core.[25] The cross-section of the ring is usually square or rectangular, but more expensive cores with circular cross-sections are also available. The primary and secondary coils are often wound concentrically to cover the entire surface of the core. This minimizes the length of wire needed and provides screening to minimize the core's magnetic field from generating electromagnetic interference.

Toroidal transformers are more efficient than the cheaper laminated E-I types for a similar power level. Other advantages compared to E-I types, include smaller size (about half), lower weight (about half), less mechanical hum (making them superior in audio amplifiers), lower exterior magnetic field (about one tenth), low off-load losses (making them more efficient in standby circuits), single-bolt mounting, and greater choice of shapes. The main disadvantages are higher cost and limited power capacity (see Classification parameters below). Because of the lack of a residual gap in the magnetic path, toroidal transformers also tend to exhibit higher inrush current, compared to laminated E-I types.

Ferrite toroidal cores are used at higher frequencies, typically between a few tens of kilohertz to hundreds of megahertz, to reduce losses, physical size, and weight of inductive components. A drawback of toroidal transformer construction is the higher labor cost of winding. This is because it is necessary to pass the entire length of a coil winding through the core aperture each time a single turn is added to the coil. As a consequence, toroidal transformers rated more than a few kVA are uncommon. Small distribution transformers may achieve some of the benefits of a toroidal core by splitting it and forcing it open, then inserting a bobbin containing primary and secondary windings.
Air cores

A physical core is not an absolute requisite and a functioning transformer can be produced simply by placing the windings near each other, an arrangement termed an 'air-core' transformer. The air which comprises the magnetic circuit is essentially lossless, and so an air-core transformer eliminates loss due to hysteresis in the core material.[10] The leakage inductance is inevitably high, resulting in very poor regulation, and so such designs are unsuitable for use in power distribution.[10] They have however very high bandwidth, and are frequently employed in radio-frequency applications,[60] for which a satisfactory coupling coefficient is maintained by carefully overlapping the primary and secondary windings. They're also used for resonant transformers such as Tesla coils where they can achieve reasonably low loss in spite of the high leakage inductance.
Windings
Windings are usually arranged concentrically to minimize flux leakage.
	It has been suggested that Compensation winding be merged into this article. (Discuss) Proposed since March 2014.

The conducting material used for the windings depends upon the application, but in all cases the individual turns must be electrically insulated from each other to ensure that the current travels throughout every turn.[61] For small power and signal transformers, in which currents are low and the potential difference between adjacent turns is small, the coils are often wound from enamelled magnet wire, such as Formvar wire. Larger power transformers operating at high voltages may be wound with copper rectangular strip conductors insulated by oil-impregnated paper and blocks of pressboard.[62]
Cut view through transformer windings. White: insulator. Green spiral: Grain oriented silicon steel. Black: Primary winding made of oxygen-free copper. Red: Secondary winding. Top left: Toroidal transformer. Right: C-core, but E-core would be similar. The black windings are made of film. Top: Equally low capacitance between all ends of both windings. Since most cores are at least moderately conductive they also need insulation. Bottom: Lowest capacitance for one end of the secondary winding needed for low-power high-voltage transformers. Bottom left: Reduction of leakage inductance would lead to increase of capacitance.

High-frequency transformers operating in the tens to hundreds of kilohertz often have windings made of braided Litz wire to minimize the skin-effect and proximity effect losses.[63] Large power transformers use multiple-stranded conductors as well, since even at low power frequencies non-uniform distribution of current would otherwise exist in high-current windings.[62] Each strand is individually insulated, and the strands are arranged so that at certain points in the winding, or throughout the whole winding, each portion occupies different relative positions in the complete conductor. The transposition equalizes the current flowing in each strand of the conductor, and reduces eddy current losses in the winding itself. The stranded conductor is also more flexible than a solid conductor of similar size, aiding manufacture.[62]

The windings of signal transformers minimize leakage inductance and stray capacitance to improve high-frequency response. Coils are split into sections, and those sections interleaved between the sections of the other winding.

Power-frequency transformers may have taps at intermediate points on the winding, usually on the higher voltage winding side, for voltage adjustment. Taps may be manually reconnected, or a manual or automatic switch may be provided for changing taps. Automatic on-load tap changers are used in electric power transmission or distribution, on equipment such as arc furnace transformers, or for automatic voltage regulators for sensitive loads. Audio-frequency transformers, used for the distribution of audio to public address loudspeakers, have taps to allow adjustment of impedance to each speaker. A center-tapped transformer is often used in the output stage of an audio power amplifier in a push-pull circuit. Modulation transformers in AM transmitters are very similar.

Dry-type transformer winding insulation systems can be either of standard open-wound 'dip-and-bake' construction or of higher quality designs that include vacuum pressure impregnation (VPI), vacuum pressure encapsulation (VPE), and cast coil encapsulation processes.[64] In the VPI process, a combination of heat, vacuum and pressure is used to thoroughly seal, bind, and eliminate entrained air voids in the winding polyester resin insulation coat layer, thus increasing resistance to corona. VPE windings are similar to VPI windings but provide more protection against environmental effects, such as from water, dirt or corrosive ambients, by multiple dips including typically in terms of final epoxy coat.[65]
Cooling
Cutaway view of liquid-immersed construction transformer. The conservator (reservoir) at top provides liquid-to-atmosphere isolation as coolant level and temperature changes. The walls and fins provide required heat dissipation balance.
See also: Arrhenius equation

To place the cooling problem in perspective, the accepted rule of thumb is that the life expectancy of insulation in all electric machines including all transformers is halved for about every 7 °C to 10 °C increase in operating temperature, this life expectancy halving rule holding more narrowly when the increase is between about 7 °C to 8 °C in the case of transformer winding cellulose insulation.[66][67][68]

Small dry-type and liquid-immersed transformers are often self-cooled by natural convection and radiation heat dissipation. As power ratings increase, transformers are often cooled by forced-air cooling, forced-oil cooling, water-cooling, or combinations of these.[69] Large transformers are filled with transformer oil that both cools and insulates the windings.[70] Transformer oil is a highly refined mineral oil that cools the windings and insulation by circulating within the transformer tank. The mineral oil and paper insulation system has been extensively studied and used for more than 100 years. It is estimated that 50% of power transformers will survive 50 years of use, that the average age of failure of power transformers is about 10 to 15 years, and that about 30% of power transformer failures are due to insulation and overloading failures.[71][72] Prolonged operation at elevated temperature degrades insulating properties of winding insulation and dielectric coolant, which not only shortens transformer life but can ultimately lead to catastrophic transformer failure.[66] With a great body of empirical study as a guide, transformer oil testing including dissolved gas analysis provides valuable maintenance information. This underlines the need to monitor, model, forecast and manage oil and winding conductor insulation temperature conditions under varying, possibly difficult, power loading conditions.[73][74]

Building regulations in many jurisdictions require indoor liquid-filled transformers to either use dielectric fluids that are less flammable than oil, or be installed in fire-resistant rooms.[37] Air-cooled dry transformers can be more economical where they eliminate the cost of a fire-resistant transformer room.

The tank of liquid filled transformers often has radiators through which the liquid coolant circulates by natural convection or fins. Some large transformers employ electric fans for forced-air cooling, pumps for forced-liquid cooling, or have heat exchangers for water-cooling.[70] An oil-immersed transformer may be equipped with a Buchholz relay, which, depending on severity of gas accumulation due to internal arcing, is used to either alarm or de-energize the transformer.[56] Oil-immersed transformer installations usually include fire protection measures such as walls, oil containment, and fire-suppression sprinkler systems.

Polychlorinated biphenyls have properties that once favored their use as a dielectric coolant, though concerns over their environmental persistence led to a widespread ban on their use.[75] Today, non-toxic, stable silicone-based oils, or fluorinated hydrocarbons may be used where the expense of a fire-resistant liquid offsets additional building cost for a transformer vault.[37][76] PCBs for new equipment were banned in 1981 and in 2000 for use in existing equipment in United Kingdom[77] Legislation enacted in Canada between 1977 and 1985 essentially bans PCB use in transformers manufactured in or imported into the country after 1980, the maximum allowable level of PCB contamination in existing mineral oil transformers being 50 ppm.[78]

Some transformers, instead of being liquid-filled, have their windings enclosed in sealed, pressurized tanks and cooled by nitrogen or sulfur hexafluoride gas.[76]

Experimental power transformers in the 500‐to‐1,000 kVA range have been built with liquid nitrogen or helium cooled superconducting windings, which eliminates winding losses without affecting core losses.[79][80]
Insulation drying

Construction of oil-filled transformers requires that the insulation covering the windings be thoroughly dried of residual moisture before the oil is introduced. Drying is carried out at the factory, and may also be required as a field service. Drying may be done by circulating hot air around the core, or by vapor-phase drying (VPD) where an evaporated solvent transfers heat by condensation on the coil and core.

For small transformers, resistance heating by injection of current into the windings is used. The heating can be controlled very well, and it is energy efficient. The method is called low-frequency heating (LFH) since the current used is at a much lower frequency than that of the power grid, which is normally 50 or 60 Hz. A lower frequency reduces the effect of inductance, so the voltage required can be reduced.[81] The LFH drying method is also used for service of older transformers.[82]
Bushings

Larger transformers are provided with high-voltage insulated bushings made of polymers or porcelain. A large bushing can be a complex structure since it must provide careful control of the electric field gradient without letting the transformer leak oil.[83]
Classification parameters

Transformers can be classified in many ways, such as the following:

    Power capacity: From a fraction of a volt-ampere (VA) to over a thousand MVA.
    Duty of a transformer: Continuous, short-time, intermittent, periodic, varying.
    Frequency range: Power-frequency, audio-frequency, or radio-frequency.
    Voltage class: From a few volts to hundreds of kilovolts.
    Cooling type: Dry and liquid-immersed – self-cooled, forced air-cooled; liquid-immersed – forced oil-cooled, water-cooled.
    Circuit application: Such as power supply, impedance matching, output voltage and current stabilizer or circuit isolation.
    Utilization: Pulse, power, distribution, rectifier, arc furnace, amplifier output, etc..
    Basic magnetic form: Core form, shell form.
    Constant-potential transformer descriptor: Step-up, step-down, isolation.
    General winding configuration: By EIC vector group – various possible two-winding combinations of the phase designations delta, wye or star, and zigzag or interconnected star;[p] other – autotransformer, Scott-T, zigzag grounding transformer winding.[84][85][86][87]
    Rectifier phase-shift winding configuration: 2-winding, 6-pulse; 3-winding, 12-pulse; . . . n-winding, [n-1]*6-pulse; polygon; etc..

Types

Various specific electrical application designs require a variety of transformer types. Although they all share the basic characteristic transformer principles, they are customize in construction or electrical properties for certain installation requirements or circuit conditions.

    Autotransformer: Transformer in which part of the winding is common to both primary and secondary circuits.[88]
    Capacitor voltage transformer: Transformer in which capacitor divider is used to reduce high voltage before application to the primary winding.
    Distribution transformer, power transformer: International standards make a distinction in terms of distribution transformers being used to distribute energy from transmission lines and networks for local consumption and power transformers being used to transfer electric energy between the generator and distribution primary circuits.[88][89][q]
    Phase angle regulating transformer: A specialised transformer used to control the flow of real power on three-phase electricity transmission networks.
    Scott-T transformer: Transformer used for phase transformation from three-phase to two-phase and vice versa.[88]
    Polyphase transformer: Any transformer with more than one phase.
    Grounding transformer: Transformer used for grounding three-phase circuits to create a neutral in a three wire system, using a wye-delta transformer,[85][90] or more commonly, a zigzag grounding winding.[85][87][88]
    Leakage transformer: Transformer that has loosely coupled windings.
    Resonant transformer: Transformer that uses resonance to generate a high secondary voltage.
    Audio transformer: Transformer used in audio equipment.
    Output transformer: Transformer used to match the output of a valve amplifier to its load.
    Instrument transformer: Potential or current transformer used to accurately and safely represent voltage, current or phase position of high voltage or high power circuits.[88]

An electrical substation in Melbourne, Australia showing three of five 220 kV – 66 kV transformers, each with a capacity of 150 MVA[91]
Applications
Transformer at the Limestone Generating Station in Manitoba, Canada

Transformers are used to increase voltage before transmitting electrical energy over long distances through wires. Wires have resistance which loses energy through joule heating at a rate corresponding to square of the current. By transforming power to a higher voltage transformers enable economical transmission of power and distribution. Consequently, transformers have shaped the electricity supply industry, permitting generation to be located remotely from points of demand.[92] All but a tiny fraction of the world's electrical power has passed through a series of transformers by the time it reaches the consumer.[44]

Transformers are also used extensively in electronic products to step-down the supply voltage to a level suitable for the low voltage circuits they contain. The transformer also electrically isolates the end user from contact with the supply voltage.

Signal and audio transformers are used to couple stages of amplifiers and to match devices such as microphones and record players to the input of amplifiers. Audio transformers allowed telephone circuits to carry on a two-way conversation over a single pair of wires. A balun transformer converts a signal that is referenced to ground to a signal that has balanced voltages to ground, such as between external cables and internal circuits.
History
Discovery of induction
Faraday's experiment with induction between coils of wire[93]

Electromagnetic induction, the principle of the operation of the transformer, was discovered independently by Michael Faraday in 1831 and Joseph Henry in 1832.[94] Also, Faraday was the first to publish the results of his experiments and thus receive credit for the discovery.[95][96] The relationship between EMF and magnetic flux is an equation now known as Faraday's law of induction:

    |\mathcal{E}| = \left|{{d\Phi_B} \over dt}\right|.

where |\mathcal{E}| is the magnitude of the EMF in Volts and ΦB is the magnetic flux through the circuit in webers.[97]

Faraday performed the first experiments on induction between coils of wire, including winding a pair of coils around an iron ring, thus creating the first toroidal closed-core transformer.[98] However he only applied individual pulses of current to his transformer, and never discovered the relation between the turns ratio and EMF in the windings.
Induction coil, 1900, Bremerhavn, Germany
Induction coils
Faraday's ring transformer

The first type of transformer to see wide use was the induction coil, invented by Rev. Nicholas Callan of Maynooth College, Ireland in 1836. He was one of the first researchers to realize the more turns the secondary winding has in relation to the primary winding, the larger the induced secondary EMF will be. Induction coils evolved from scientists' and inventors' efforts to get higher voltages from batteries. Since batteries produce direct current (DC) rather than AC, induction coils relied upon vibrating electrical contacts that regularly interrupted the current in the primary to create the flux changes necessary for induction. Between the 1830s and the 1870s, efforts to build better induction coils, mostly by trial and error, slowly revealed the basic principles of transformers.
First alternating current transformers

By the 1870s, efficient generators producing alternating current (AC) were available, and it was found AC could power an induction coil directly, without an interrupter.

In 1876, Russian engineer Pavel Yablochkov invented a lighting system based on a set of induction coils where the primary windings were connected to a source of AC. The secondary windings could be connected to several 'electric candles' (arc lamps) of his own design.[99] [100] The coils Yablochkov employed functioned essentially as transformers.[99]

In 1878, the Ganz factory, Budapest, Hungary, began manufacturing equipment for electric lighting and, by 1883, had installed over fifty systems in Austria-Hungary. Their AC systems used arc and incandescent lamps, generators, and other equipment.[101]

Lucien Gaulard and John Dixon Gibbs first exhibited a device with an open iron core called a 'secondary generator' in London in 1882, then sold the idea to the Westinghouse company in the United States.[52] They also exhibited the invention in Turin, Italy in 1884, where it was adopted for an electric lighting system.[102] However, the efficiency of their open-core bipolar apparatus remained very low.[102]
Early series circuit transformer distribution

Induction coils with open magnetic circuits are inefficient at transferring power to loads. Until about 1880, the paradigm for AC power transmission from a high voltage supply to a low voltage load was a series circuit. Open-core transformers with a ratio near 1:1 were connected with their primaries in series to allow use of a high voltage for transmission while presenting a low voltage to the lamps. The inherent flaw in this method was that turning off a single lamp (or other electric device) affected the voltage supplied to all others on the same circuit. Many adjustable transformer designs were introduced to compensate for this problematic characteristic of the series circuit, including those employing methods of adjusting the core or bypassing the magnetic flux around part of a coil.[102] Efficient, practical transformer designs did not appear until the 1880s, but within a decade, the transformer would be instrumental in the War of Currents, and in seeing AC distribution systems triumph over their DC counterparts, a position in which they have remained dominant ever since.[103]
Shell form transformer. Sketch used by Uppenborn to describe ZBD engineers' 1885 patents and earliest articles.[102]
Core form, front; shell form, back. Earliest specimens of ZBD-designed high-efficiency constant-potential transformers manufactured at the Ganz factory in 1885.
The ZBD team consisted of Károly Zipernowsky, Ottó Bláthy and Miksa Déri
Stanley's 1886 design for adjustable gap open-core induction coils[104]
Closed-core transformers and parallel power distribution

In the autumn of 1884, Károly Zipernowsky, Ottó Bláthy and Miksa Déri (ZBD), three engineers associated with the Ganz factory, had determined that open-core devices were impracticable, as they were incapable of reliably regulating voltage.[105] In their joint 1885 patent applications for novel transformers (later called ZBD transformers), they described two designs with closed magnetic circuits where copper windings were either a) wound around iron wire ring core or b) surrounded by iron wire core.[102] The two designs were the first application of the two basic transformer constructions in common use to this day, which can as a class all be termed as either core form or shell form (or alternatively, core type or shell type), as in a) or b), respectively (see images).[46][47][106][107] The Ganz factory had also in the autumn of 1884 made delivery of the world's first five high-efficiency AC transformers, the first of these units having been shipped on September 16, 1884.[108] This first unit had been manufactured to the following specifications: 1,400 W, 40 Hz, 120:72 V, 11.6:19.4 A, ratio 1.67:1, one-phase, shell form.[108]

In both designs, the magnetic flux linking the primary and secondary windings traveled almost entirely within the confines of the iron core, with no intentional path through air (see Toroidal cores below). The new transformers were 3.4 times more efficient than the open-core bipolar devices of Gaulard and Gibbs.[109] The ZBD patents included two other major interrelated innovations: one concerning the use of parallel connected, instead of series connected, utilization loads, the other concerning the ability to have high turns ratio transformers such that the supply network voltage could be much higher (initially 1,400 to 2,000 V) than the voltage of utilization loads (100 V initially preferred).[110][111] When employed in parallel connected electric distribution systems, closed-core transformers finally made it technically and economically feasible to provide electric power for lighting in homes, businesses and public spaces.[112][113] Bláthy had suggested the use of closed cores, Zipernowsky had suggested the use of parallel shunt connections, and Déri had performed the experiments;[114]

Transformers today are designed on the principles discovered by the three engineers. They also popularized the word 'transformer' to describe a device for altering the EMF of an electric current,[112][115] although the term had already been in use by 1882.[116][117] In 1886, the ZBD engineers designed, and the Ganz factory supplied electrical equipment for, the world's first power station that used AC generators to power a parallel connected common electrical network, the steam-powered Rome-Cerchi power plant.[118]

Although George Westinghouse had bought Gaulard and Gibbs' patents in 1885, the Edison Electric Light Company held an option on the US rights for the ZBD transformers, requiring Westinghouse to pursue alternative designs on the same principles. He assigned to William Stanley the task of developing a device for commercial use in United States.[119] Stanley's first patented design was for induction coils with single cores of soft iron and adjustable gaps to regulate the EMF present in the secondary winding (see image).[104] This design[120] was first used commercially in the US in 1886[103] but Westinghouse was intent on improving the Stanley design to make it (unlike the ZBD type) easy and cheap to produce.[120]

Westinghouse, Stanley and associates soon developed an easier to manufacture core, consisting of a stack of thin 'E‑shaped' iron plates, insulated by thin sheets of paper or other insulating material. Prewound copper coils could then be slid into place, and straight iron plates laid in to create a closed magnetic circuit. Westinghouse applied for a patent for the new low-cost design in December 1886; it was granted in July 1887.[114][121]
Other early transformers

In 1889, Russian-born engineer Mikhail Dolivo-Dobrovolsky developed the first three-phase transformer at the Allgemeine Elektricitäts-Gesellschaft ('General Electricity Company') in Germany.[122]

In 1891, Nikola Tesla invented the Tesla coil, an air-cored, dual-tuned resonant transformer for generating very high voltages at high frequency.[123][124]
See also
Portal icon 	Energy portal
Portal icon 	Electronics portal

    Compensation winding
    Inductor
    Load profile
    Magnetic core
    Magnetization
    Paraformer
    Polyphase system
    Rectiformer
    Switched-mode power supply

Notes

Where Vs is the instantaneous voltage, Ns is the number of turns in the secondary winding, and dΦ/dt is the derivative of the magnetic flux Φ through one turn of the winding. With turns of the winding oriented perpendicularly to the magnetic field lines, the flux is the product of the magnetic flux density and the core area, the magnetic field varying with time according to the excitation of the primary. The expression dΦ/dt, defined as the derivative of magnetic flux Φ with time t, provides a measure of rate of magnetic flux in the core and hence of EMF induced in the respective winding. The negative sign is described by Lenz's law.
Although ideal transformer's winding inductances are each infinitely high, the square root of winding inductances' ratio is equal to the turns ratio.[4]
This also implies the following: Input impedance is infinite when secondary is open and zero when secondary is shorted; there is zero phase-shift through an ideal transformer; input and output power and reactive volt-ampere are each conserved; these three statements apply for any frequency above zero and periodic waveforms are conserved.[6]
Windings of real transformers are usually wound around very high permeability ferromagnetic cores but can also be air-core wound.
Direction of transformer currents is according to Right-hand rule.
Section Leakage factor and inductance of Leakage inductance derives a transformer equivalent in terms of various measurable inductances (winding, self, leakage, magnetizing and mutual inductances) and turns ratio, which are collectively essential to rigorous counter EMF understanding.
"The turn ratio of a transformer is the ratio of the number of turns in the high-voltage winding to that in the low-voltage winding",[13] common usage having evolved over time from 'turn ratio' to 'turns ratio'. However, some sources use the inverse definition.[14]
A step-down transformer converts a high voltage to a lower voltage while a step-up transformer converts a low voltage to a higher voltage, an isolation transformer having 1:1 turns ratio with output voltage the same as input voltage.
ANSI/IEEE Standard C57.13 defines polarity in terms of the relative instantaneous directions of the currents entering the primary terminals and leaving the secondary terminals during most of each half cycle, the word 'instantaneous' differentiating from say phasor current.[20][21]
Transformer polarity can also be identified by terminal markings H0,H1,H2... on primary terminals and X1,X2, (and Y1,Y2, Z1,Z2,Z3... if windings are available) on secondary terminals. Each letter prefix designates a different winding and each numeral designates a termination or tap on each winding. The designated terminals H1,X1, (and Y1, Z1 if available) indicate same instantaneous polarities for each winding as in the dot convention.[22]
When a voltage transformer is operated with sinusoidal voltages in its normal frequency range and power level the voltage polarity at the output dot is the same (plus minus a few degrees) as the voltage polarity at the input dot.
Percent impedance is the ratio of the voltage drop in the secondary from no load to full load; and is here represented with the variable Z.[27] In some texts, Z is used for absolute impedance instead.
A standardized open-circuit or unloaded transformer test called the Epstein frame can also be used for the characterization of magnetic properties of soft magnetic materials including especially electrical steels.[32]
Experimental transformers using superconducting windings achieve efficiencies of 99.85%.[39]
Transformer hum's fundamental noise frequency is two times that of the power frequency as there is an extension and a contraction of core laminations for every cycle of the AC wave and a transformer's audible hum noise level is dominated by the fundamental noise frequency and its first triplen harmonic, i.e., by the 100 & 300 Hz, or 120 & 360 Hz, frequencies.[43]
For example, the delta-wye transformer, by far the most common commercial three-phase transformer, is known as the Dyn11 vector group configuration, Dyn11 denoting D for delta primary winding, y for wye secondary winding, n for neutral of the wye winding, and 11 for relative phase position on the clock by which the secondary winding leads the primary winding, namely, 30° leading.

    While the above formal definition, derived from standards such as IEEE C57.12.80, applies to large transformers, it is not uncommon in colloquial, or even trade, parlance for small general-purpose transformers to be referred to as 'power' transformers, for distribution transformers to be referred to as 'power distribution' transformers, and so on.

References

Knowlton, A.E. (Ed.) (1949). Standard Handbook for Electrical Engineers (8th ed.). McGraw-Hill. p. 597, Fig. 6–42.
Mack, James E.; Shoemaker, Thomas (2006). Chapter 15 - Distribution Transformers (11th ed.). New York: McGraw-Hill. pp. 15–1 to 15–22. ISBN 0-07-146789-0.
Bedell, Frederick. "History of A-C Wave Form, Its Determination and Standardization". Transactions of the American Institute of Electrical Engineers 61 (12): p. 864. doi:10.1109/T-AIEE.1942.5058456.
Brenner, Egon; Javid, Mansour (1959). "§18.1 'Symbols and Polarity of Mutual Inductance' in Chapter 18 – Circuits with Magnetic Circuits". Analysis of Electric Circuits. McGraw-Hill. pp. 598–599.
Brenner, pp. 598–600
Crosby, D. (1958). "The Ideal Transformer". IRE Transactions on Circuit.Theory 5 (2): 145–145. doi:10.1109/TCT.1958.1086447.
Hameyer, Kay (2001). "§2.1.2 'Second Maxwell-Equation (Faraday's Law)' in Section 2 - Basics". Electrical Machines I: Basics, Design, Function, Operation. RWTH Aachen University Institute of Electrical Machines. pp. 11–12, eq. 2–12 to 2–15.
Heathcote, Martin (Nov 3, 1998). J & P Transformer Book (12th ed.). Newnes. pp. 2–3. ISBN 0-7506-1158-8.
Rajput, R.K. (2002). Alternating current machines (3rd ed.). New Delhi: Laxmi Publications. p. 107. ISBN 9788170082224.
Calvert, James (2001). "Inside Transformers". University of Denver. Retrieved May 19, 2007.
Winders, John J., Jr. (2002). Power Transformer Principles and Applications. CRC. pp. 20–21.
Hameyer, Kay (2001). "§3.2 'Definition of Transformer Ratio' in Section 3 - Transformers". Electrical Machines I: Basics, Design, Function, Operation. RWTH Aachen University Institute of Electrical Machines. p. 27.
Knowlton, §6-13, p. 552
Miller, Wilhelm C.; Robbins, Allan H. (2013). Circuit analysis : theory and practice (5th ed.). Clifton Park, NY: Cengage Learning. p. 990. ISBN 978-1-1332-8100-9. Retrieved 25 September 2014.
Flanagan, pp. 1–2
Tcheslavski, Gleb V. (2008). "Slide 13 Impedance Transformation in Lecture 4: Transformers". ELEN 3441 Fundamentals of Power Engineering. Lamar University (TSU system member).
Parker, M. R; Ula, S.; Webb, W. E. (2005). "§2.5.5 'Transformers' & §10.1.3 'The Ideal Transformer'". In Whitaker, Jerry C. The Electronics Handbook (2nd ed.). Taylor & Francis. pp. 172, 1017. ISBN 0-8493-1889-0.
Kothari, D.P.; Nagrath, I.J. (2010). §3.7 'Transformer Testing' in Chapter 3 – Transformers (4th ed.). Tata McGraw-Hill. p. 73. ISBN 978-0-07-069967-0.
Brenner, pp. 589–590
"Polarity Markings on Instrument Transformers". Retrieved 13 April 2013.
ANSI/IEEE C57.13, ANS Requirements for Instrument Transformers. New York, N.Y.: IEEE. 1978 (superseded, 1993). p. 4 (§3.26). ISBN 0-7381-4299-9. Check date values in: |date= (help)
"Connections - Polarity". Retrieved 13 April 2013.
Say, M. G. (1984). Alternating Current Machines (5th ed.). Halsted Press. ISBN 0-470-27451-4.
McLaren, P. G. (1984). Elementary Electric Power and Machines. pp. 68–74. ISBN 0-13-257601-5.
Say, p. 485
Terman, Frederick E. (1955). Electronic and Radio Engineering (4th ed.). New York: McGraw-Hill. p. 15.
Heathcote, p. 4
Knowlton, pp. 585-586
Hameyer, p. 39
Daniels, A. R. Introduction to Electrical Machines. pp. 47–49.
Say, pp. 142-143
IEC Std 60404-2 Magnetic Materials – Part 2: Methods of Measurement of the Magnetic Properties . . .
Hameyer, p. 11, eq. 2-13
Billings, Keith (1999). Switchmode Power Supply Handbook. McGraw-Hill. ISBN 0-07-006719-8.
"400 Hz Electrical Systems". Aerospaceweb.org. Retrieved May 21, 2007.
Gururaj, B.I. (June 1963). "Natural Frequencies of 3-Phase Transformer Windings". IEEE Transactions on Power Apparatus and Systems 82 (66): 318–329. doi:10.1109/TPAS.1963.291359.
De Keulenaer, Hans; Chapman, David; Fassbinder, Stefan; McDermott, Mike (2001). "The Scope for Energy Saving in the EU through the Use of Energy-Efficient Electricity Distribution Transformers". Institution of Engineering and Technology. Retrieved 10 July 2014.
Kubo, T.; Sachs, H.; Nadel, S. (2001). Opportunities for New Appliance and Equipment Efficiency Standards. American Council for an Energy-Efficient Economy. p. 39. Retrieved June 21, 2009.
Riemersma, H.; Eckels, P.; Barton, M.; Murphy, J.; Litz, D.; Roach, J. (1981). "Application of Superconducting Technology to Power Transformers". IEEE Transactions on Power Apparatus and Systems. PAS-100 (7): 3398. doi:10.1109/TPAS.1981.316682.
Heathcote, pp. 41-42
Knowlton, pp. 49 (§2.67) & 323 (§4.279)
EE-Reviewonline.com. "Steinmetz's Formula for Magnetic Hysteresis". Retrieved 7 February 2013.
"Understanding Transformer Noise". FP. Retrieved 30 January 2013.
Nailen, Richard (May 2005). "Why We Must Be Concerned With Transformers". Electrical Apparatus.
Pansini, Anthony J. (1999). Electrical Transformers and Power Equipment. Fairmont Press. p. 23. ISBN 0-88173-311-3.
Del Vecchio, Robert M. et al. (2002). Transformer Design Principles: With Applications to Core-Form Power Transformers. Boca Raton: CRC Press. pp. 10–11, Fig. 1.8. ISBN 90-5699-703-3.
Knowlton, p. 562
Hydroelectric Research and Technical Services Group. "Transformers: Basics, Maintenance, and Diagnostics". U.S. Dept. of the Interior, Bureau of Reclamation. p. 12. Retrieved Mar 27, 2012.
EM 1110-2-3006 (1994). "Chapter 4 - Power Transformers". Engineering and Design – Hydroelectric Power Plants Electrical Design. U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. p. 4-1.
Hindmarsh, J. (1984). Electrical Machines and Their Applications. Oxford: Pergamon Press. pp. 29–31. ISBN 0-08-030573-3.
Gottlieb, Irving (1998). Practical Transformer Handbook. Newnes. p. 4. ISBN 0-7506-3992-X.
Allan, D.J. (Jan 1991). "Power Transformers – The Second Century". Power Engineering Journal 5 (1): 5–14. doi:10.1049/pe:19910004.
Kulkarni, S. V.; Khaparde, S. A. (May 24, 2004). Transformer Engineering: Design and Practice. CRC. pp. 36–37. ISBN 0-8247-5653-3.
Hindmarsh, pp. 29-31
McLyman, Colonel Wm. T. (2004). Transformer and Inductor Design Handbook. CRC. Chap. 3, pp. 9–14. ISBN 0-8247-5393-3.
Sim, H. Jim; Digby; Scott H. (2004). "§2.1 Power Transformers in Chap. 2 - Equipment Types". In L. L. Grigsby; James H. Harlow. The Electric Power Engineering Handbook (Online ed.). CRC Press. §2.1.7 & §2.1.6.2.1. ISBN 0-8493-8578-4.
Boteler, D. H.; Pirjola, R. J.; Nevanlinna, H. (1998). "The Effects of Geomagnetic Disturbances On Electrical Systems at the Earth's Surface". Advances in Space Research 22: 17–27. doi:10.1016/S0273-1177(97)01096-X.
Hasegawa, Ryusuke (June 2, 2000). "Present Status of Amorphous Soft Magnetic Alloys". Journal of Magnetism and Magnetic Materials. 215-216: 240–245. doi:10.1016/S0304-8853(00)00126-8.
McLyman, Chap. 3 p. 1
Lee, Reuben. "Air-Core Transformers". Electronic Transformers and Circuits. Retrieved May 22, 2007.
Dixon, L.H., Jr. (1997). "Eddy Current Losses in Transformer Windings". Texas Instrument. pp. R2–1–to–R2–10.
Central Electricity Generating Board (1982). Modern Power Station Practice. Pergamon Press.
Dixon, Lloyd (2001). "Power Transformer Design". Magnetics Design Handbook. Texas Instruments.
Lane, Keith (2007). "The Basics of Large Dry-Type Transformers". EC&M. Retrieved 29 January 2013.
Heathcote, pp. 720–723
Tillman, Robert F. (2004). "§3.4 Load and Thermal Performance in Chap. 3 - Ancillary Topics". In James H. Harlow (ed.); L. L. Grigsby (Series ed.). The Electric Power Engineering Handbook (Online ed.). CRC Press. p. §3.4.8. ISBN 0-8493-8578-4.
Walling, Reigh; Shattuck; G. Bruce (May 2007). Distribution Transformer Thermal Behaviour and Aging in Local-Delivery Distribution Systems. 19th International Conference on Electricity Distribution. Paper 0720. Retrieved 11 February 2013.
Kimberly, E.E. "Permissible Temperatures for Insulation". Retrieved 12 February 2013.
Pansini, p. 32
Willis, H. Lee (2004). Power Distribution Planning Reference Book. CRC Press. p. 403. ISBN 0-8247-4875-1.
Hartley, William H. (2003). Analysis of Transformer Failures. 36th Annual Conference of the International Association of Engineering Insurers. p. 7 (fig. 6). Retrieved 30 January 2013.
Hartley, William H. (~2011). "An Analysis of Transformer Failures, Part 1 – 1988 through 1997". The Locomotive. Retrieved 30 January 2013.
Prevost, Thomas A. et al. (Nov 2006). "Estimation of Insulation Life Based on a Dual Temperature Aging Model". Weidmann. p. 1. Retrieved Mar 30, 2012.
Sen, P.K. et al. (2011). "PSERC Pub. 11-02 Transformer Overloading and Assessment of Loss-of-Life for Liquid-Filled Transformers". Power Systems Engineering Research Center, Arizona State University. Retrieved 11 January 2013.
"ASTDR ToxFAQs for Polychlorinated Biphenyls". 2001. Retrieved June 10, 2007.
Kulkarni, pp. 2–3
AFBI (2011). "9. Contaminants". State of the Seas Report. Agri-Food and Biosciences Institute & Northern Ireland Environment Agency. p. 71. ISBN 978-1-907053-20-7. Unknown ID 9977.
McDonald, C. J.; Tourangeau, R. E. (1986). PCBs, Question and Answer Guide Concerning Polychlorinated Biphenyls. Government of Canada: Environment Canada Department. ISBN 0-662-14595-X. Retrieved Nov 7, 2007.
Mehta, S.P.; Aversa, N.; Walker, M.S. (Jul 1997). "Transforming Transformers [Superconducting windings]". IEEE Spectrum 34 (7): 43–49. doi:10.1109/6.609815. Retrieved 14 November 2012.
Pansini, pp. 66–67
Fink, Donald G.; Beatty, H. Wayne (Eds.) (1978). Standard Handbook for Electrical Engineers (11th ed.). McGraw Hill. pp. 10–38 through 10–40. ISBN 978-0-07-020974-9.
Figueroa, Elisa et al (Jan–Feb 2009). "Low Frequency Heating Field Dry-Out of a 750 MVA 500 kV Auto Transformer". Electricity Today. Retrieved Feb 28, 2012.
Ryan, Hugh M. (2001). High Voltage Engineering and Testing. Institution Electrical Engineers. pp. 416–417. ISBN 0-85296-775-6.
Lawhead, Larry; Hamilton, Randy; Horak, John (2006). "Three Phase Transformer Winding Configurations and Differential Relay Compensation". Georgia Tech 60th Protective Relay Conference. pp. 8–10. Retrieved Feb 23, 2012.
Beeman, Donald (Ed.) (1955). Industrial Power Systems Handbook. McGraw-Hill. pp. 349–364.
Brown, BIll. "Section 6 Grounding Systems". Schneider. pp. 9–12. Retrieved 18 January 2013.
Beltz, Robert; Peacock, Ian; Vilcheck, William (2000). Application Considerations for High Resistance Ground Retrofits in Pulp and Paper Mills. Pulp and Paper Industry Technical Conference. pp. 33–40. doi:10.1109/PAPCON.2000.854186.
Knowlton, §6–7, pp. 549–550
IEEE PES TC (Fall 2011). "Discussion of Class I & II Terminology". IEEE PES Transformer Committee. p. slide 6. Retrieved 27 January 2013.
Knowlton, §12-341, fig. 12-95, p. 1085
AEMO et al. (2012). "Joint Consultation Paper - Western Metropolitan Melbourne Transmission Connection and Subtransmission Capacity". p. 11. Retrieved and archived 4 January 2013. Check date values in: |accessdate= (help)
Heathcote, p. 1
Poyser, Arthur William (1892). Magnetism and Electricity: A Manual for Students in Advanced Classes. London and New York: Longmans, Green, & Co. p. 285, fig. 248.
"A Brief History of Electromagnetism".
"Joseph Henry". Distinguished Members Gallery, National Academy of Sciences. Archived from the original on 13 of December of 2013. Check date values in: |archivedate= (help)
"Electromagnetism". Smithsonian Institution Archives.
Chow, Tai L. (2006). Introduction to Electromagnetic Theory: A Modern Perspective. Sudbury, Mass.: Jones and Bartlett Publishers. p. 171. ISBN 0-7637-3827-1.
Faraday, Michael (1834). "Experimental Researches on Electricity, 7th Series". Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society 124: 77–122. doi:10.1098/rstl.1834.0008.
"Stanley Transformer". Los Alamos National Laboratory; University of Florida. Retrieved Jan 9, 2009.
De Fonveille, W. (Jan 22, 1880). "Gas and Electricity in Paris". Nature 21 (534): 283. Bibcode:1880Natur..21..282D. doi:10.1038/021282b0. Retrieved Jan 9, 2009.
Hughes, Thomas P. (1993). Networks of Power: Electrification in Western Society, 1880-1930. Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins University Press. p. 96. ISBN 0-8018-2873-2. Retrieved Sep 9, 2009.
Uppenborn, F. J. (1889). History of the Transformer. London: E. & F. N. Spon. pp. 35–41.
Coltman, J. W. (Jan 1988). "The Transformer". Scientific American. pp. 86–95. OSTI 6851152.
Stanley, William, Jr.. "Induction Coil". U.S. Patent 349 311, issued Sept. 21, 1886. Retrieved July 13, 2009.
Hughes, p. 95
Károly, Simonyi. "The Faraday Law With a Magnetic Ohm's Law". Természet Világa. Retrieved Mar 1, 2012.
Lucas, J.R. "Historical Development of the Transformer". IEE Sri Lanka Centre. Retrieved Mar 1, 2012.
Halacsy, A. A.; Von Fuchs, G. H. (April 1961). "Transformer Invented 75 Years Ago". IEEE Transactions of the American Institute of Electrical Engineers 80 (3): 121–125. doi:10.1109/AIEEPAS.1961.4500994. Retrieved Feb 29, 2012.
Jeszenszky, Sándor. "Electrostatics and Electrodynamics at Pest University in the Mid-19th Century". University of Pavia. Retrieved Mar 3, 2012.
"Hungarian Inventors and Their Inventions". Institute for Developing Alternative Energy in Latin America. Retrieved Mar 3, 2012.
"Bláthy, Ottó Titusz". Budapest University of Technology and Economics, National Technical Information Centre and Library. Retrieved Feb 29, 2012.
"Bláthy, Ottó Titusz (1860–1939)". Hungarian Patent Office. Retrieved Jan 29, 2004.
Zipernowsky, K.; Déri, M.; Bláthy, O.T. "Induction Coil". U.S. Patent 352 105, issued Nov. 2, 1886. Retrieved July 8, 2009.
Smil, Vaclav (2005). Creating the Twentieth Century: Technical Innovations of 1867—1914 and Their Lasting Impact. Oxford: Oxford University Press. p. 71. ISBN 978-0-19-803774-3.
Nagy, Árpád Zoltán (Oct 11, 1996). "Lecture to Mark the 100th Anniversary of the Discovery of the Electron in 1897 (preliminary text)". Budapest. Retrieved July 9, 2009.
Oxford English Dictionary (2nd ed.). Oxford University Press. 1989.
Hospitalier, Édouard (1882). The Modern Applications of Electricity. Translated by Julius Maier. New York: D. Appleton & Co. p. 103.
"Ottó Bláthy, Miksa Déri, Károly Zipernowsky". IEC Techline. Retrieved Apr 16, 2010.
Skrabec, Quentin R. (2007). George Westinghouse: Gentle Genius. Algora Publishing. p. 102. ISBN 978-0-87586-508-9.
Coltman, J.W.; (Jan–Feb 2002). "The Transformer [Historical Overview]". Industry Applications Magazine, IEEE 8 (1): 8–15. doi:10.1109/2943.974352. Retrieved Feb 29, 2012.
Westinghouse, George, Jr.. "Electrical Converter". U.S. Patent 366 362, issued July 12, 1887.
Neidhöfer, Gerhard (2008). Michael von Dolivo-Dobrowolsky and Three-Phase: The Beginnings of Modern Drive Technology and Power Supply (in German). In collaboration with VDE "History of Electrical Engineering" Committee (2 ed.). Berlin: VDE-Verl. ISBN 978-3-8007-3115-2.
Uth, Robert (Dec 12, 2000). "Tesla Coil". Tesla: Master of Lightning. PBS.org. Retrieved May 20, 2008.

    Tesla, Nikola. "System of Electrical Lighting". U.S. Patent 454 622, issued June 23, 1891.

Bibliography

    Central Electricity Generating Board (1982). Modern Power Station Practice. Pergamon. ISBN 0-08-016436-6.
    Daniels, A.R. (1985). Introduction to Electrical Machines. Macmillan. ISBN 0-333-19627-9.
    Flanagan, William M. (1993). Handbook of Transformer Design & Applications (2nd ed.). McGraw-Hill. ISBN 0-07-021291-0.
    Gottlieb, Irving (1998). Practical Transformer Handbook: for Electronics, Radio and Communications Engineers. Elsevier. ISBN 0-7506-3992-X.
    Hammond, John Winthrop (1941). Men and Volts: The Story of General Electric. J.B. Lippincott Company. pp. see esp. 106–107, 178, 238.
    Harlow, James (2004). Electric Power Transformer Engineering. CRC Press. ISBN 0-8493-1704-5.
    Heathcote, Martin (1998). J & P Transformer Book (12th ed.). Newnes. ISBN 0-7506-1158-8.
    Hindmarsh, John (1977). Electrical Machines and Their Applications (4th ed.). Exeter: Pergamon. ISBN 0-08-030573-3.
    Kulkarni, S.V.; Khaparde, S.A. (2004). Transformer Engineering: Design and Practice. CRC Press. ISBN 0-8247-5653-3.
    McLaren, Peter (1984). Elementary Electric Power and Machines. Ellis Horwood. ISBN 0-470-20057-X.
    McLyman, Colonel William (2004). Transformer and Inductor Design Handbook. CRC. ISBN 0-8247-5393-3.
    Pansini, Anthony (1999). Electrical Transformers and Power Equipment. CRC Press. ISBN 0-88173-311-3.
    Ryan, H.M. (2004). High Voltage Engineering and Testing. CRC Press. ISBN 0-85296-775-6.
    Say, M.G. (1983). Alternating Current Machines (5th ed.). London: Pitman. ISBN 0-273-01969-4.
    Winders, Jr., John J. (2002). Power Transformer Principles and Applications. CRC. ISBN 0-8247-0766-4.

External links
	Wikimedia Commons has media related to Transformers.
	The Wikibook School Science has a page on the topic of: How to make a transformer

    Inside Transformers, composed by J. B. Calvert, from Denver University
    Substation and Transmission at DMOZ
    Introduction to Current Transformers
    Transformer (Interactive Java applet), 'Physics is fun' by Chui-king Ng
    HD video tutorial on transformers
    (Video) Power transformer inrush current (damping) from YouTube
    (Video) Power transformer over-excitation (damping) from YouTube
    Three-phase transformer circuits from All About Circuits
    Bibliography of Transformer Books by P.M. Balma, from IEEE Transformer Committee
    Einschalten des Transformators. German Wikipedia article about transformer inrush current at switch on (in German).

[hide]

    v
    t
    e

SI Electromagnetic Units
SI electro-
magnetism
units
	

    C - Capacitance (F)
    Q - Charge (C)
    G, B, Y - Conductance, susceptance, admitance (S)
    κ, γ, σ - Conductivity (S/m)
    I - Current (A)
    D - Electric displacement field (C/m2)
    E - Electric field (V/m)
    ΦE - Electric flux (V⋅m)
    χe - Electric susceptibility
    φ - Electric scalar potential (V)
    U, ΔV, Δφ; E - Emf (V)
    L, M - Inductance (H)
    H - Magnetic field (A/m) strength
    Φ - Magnetic flux (Wb)
    B - Magnetic flux density (T)
    χ - Magnetic susceptibility
    A - Magnetic vector potential (V⋅s/m)
    μ - Permeability (H/m)
    ε - Permittivity (F/m)
    S, P, Q - Apparent, Real, Reactive Power (VA, W, VAR)
    R, X, Z - Resistance, reactance, impedance (Ω)
    ρ - Resistivity (Ω⋅m)

[show]

    v
    t
    e

Electricity delivery
[show]

    v
    t
    e

Electronic components
Categories:

    Electrical power conversion
    Hungarian inventions
    Russian inventions
    Transformers (electrical)