Don Quixote (/ˌdɒn kiːˈhoʊtiː/; Spanish: [ˈdoŋ kiˈxote] ( listen)), fully titled The Ingenious Gentleman Don Quixote of La Mancha (Spanish: El ingenioso hidalgo don Quijote de la Mancha), is a Spanish novel by Miguel de Cervantes Saavedra.

It follows the adventures of a nameless hidalgo (at the end of Part II given the name Alonso Quixano) who reads so many chivalric novels that he loses his sanity and decides to set out to revive chivalry, undo wrongs, and bring justice to the world, under the name Don Quixote.

He recruits a simple farmer, Sancho Panza, as his squire, who often employs a unique, earthy wit in dealing with Don Quixote's rhetorical orations on antiquated knighthood.

Don Quixote, in the first part of the book, does not see the world for what it is, and prefers to imagine that he is living out a knightly story.

The story implements various themes, such as intertextuality, realism, metatheatre, and literary representation.

Published in two volumes, in 1605 and 1615, Don Quixote is considered the most influential work of literature from the Spanish 

Golden Age and the entire Spanish literary canon.

As a founding work of modern Western literature,[citation needed] and one of the earliest canonical novels, it regularly appears high on lists of the greatest works of fiction ever published, such as the Bokklubben World Library collection which cites Don Quixote as authors' choice for the "best literary work ever written".[1] It has had major influence on the literary community, 

as evidenced by direct references in Alexandre Dumas' The Three Musketeers (1844) and Mark Twain's Adventures of Huckleberry Finn (1884).

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
For other uses, see Don Quixote (disambiguation).

Lost Luggage is an action video game developed and released in 1982 for the Atari 2600 by the Texas-based studio Games by Apollo.

The player controls skycap porters working at an airport and tries to collect pieces of luggage that fall from a frantic overhead luggage carousel.

A two-player mode, in which the second player controls the direction the luggage falls, is included.

Programmer Ed Salvo was inspired to begin making Lost Luggage when he was waiting for his luggage at the Dallas/Fort Worth International Airport, and the game took around four weeks to make.

A four-minute advertising jingle was recorded for the game, but never used.

Most reviewers criticized the game's similarity to the Activision game Kaboom!, believing Lost Luggage to be an inferior clone, but a reviewer for the magazine TV Gamer recommended the game for children, and Videogaming Illustrated described the game as the most charming of Apollo's releases.




    A series of suicide bombings by Boko Haram in Maiduguri, Nigeria, kills at least 54 people and wounds more than 140 others.
	
    The Iraqi government reports that the ancient cities of Hatra and Nimrud have been destroyed by ISIL, who claimed they were blasphemous.
	
    NASA's Dawn spacecraft enters orbit around the dwarf planet Ceres (pictured).
	
    Pakalitha Mosisili forms a coalition government following a snap election in Lesotho.
	
    The wreck of the Japanese battleship Musashi is discovered in the Sibuyan Sea of the Philippines.
	
    The Reform Party wins the Estonian parliamentary election.

Ongoing: Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant – War in Ukraine
Recent deaths: Dave Mackay – Minnie Miñoso – Yaşar Kemal

Self-Portrait as the Allegory of Painting 	

Self-Portrait as the Allegory of Painting is an oil painting on canvas by the Italian Baroque artist Artemisia Gentileschi,


 Boris Nemtsov: two charged over killing of Russian opposition politician

Five people detained in connection with killing attend preliminary hearing in Moscow court
Zaur Dadayev, charged with involvement in the murder of Boris Nemtsov, inside a defendants’ cage in a court building in Moscow.
Zaur Dadayev, charged with involvement in the murder of Boris Nemtsov, inside a defendants’ cage in a court building in Moscow.

Photograph: Tatyana Makeyeva/Reuters

Chris Johnston in London and Reuters in Moscow
@cajuk

Sunday 8 March 2015 12.59 GMT Last modified on Sunday 8 March 2015 15.13 GMT

    Share on Facebook
    Share on Twitter
    Share via Email
    Share on LinkedIn
    Share on Google+

Shares
220

Moscow authorities have charged two men with involvement in the murder of Kremlin critic Boris Nemtsov, one of whom served in a police unit in the Russian region of Chechnya, according to a law enforcement official.

A total of five men appeared at a Moscow courtroom on Sunday.

Three of them have not yet been charged and are being treated as suspects, said court spokeswoman Anna Fadeyeva.

Court officials named Anzor Gubashev and Zaur Dadayev as those charged, and said Gubashev’s brother Shagid was one of the three suspects.

Russian media reports said they originated from Chechnya, the predominantly Muslim southern republic of Russia that has seen violent separatist insurgencies over the past two decades.

The judge at Dadayev’s hearing, Natalia Mushnikova, said Dadayev had admitted involvement in the killing and ordered him to be held in custody until 28 April.

“Dadayev’s involvement in committing this crime is confirmed by, apart from his own confession, the totality of evidence gathered as part of this criminal case,” she told the court.

Nemtsov, 55, was shot four times in the back by a gunman in a passing car while walking close to the Kremlin on the evening of 27 February.

The prime witness to the killing returned to Kiev this week.

She told the media she was unable to identify who shot Nemtsov.

Nemtsov was killed two days before he was due to lead an opposition rally in Moscow.

A memorial held instead was attended by tens of thousands of people.

Many believe the killing, which occurred in an area of high security near the Kremlin, would not have been possible without official involvement, and may have been an attempt to intimidate other government opponents.
Advertisement

Another opposition figure, Alexei Navalny, who was released from a two-week detention in prison on Friday for organising the initial anti-government rally, accused Russia’s “political leadership” of ordering the assassination of Nemtsov.

“There will be no let-up in our efforts.

We will give up nothing.

This act of terror has not achieved its goal,” he said on Friday.

Friends said Nemtsov had been working on a report containing what he described as proof of Russian military involvement in eastern Ukraine.

Nemtsov was deputy prime minister in the 1990s in the government of Boris Yeltsin, which made him a tainted figure in the eyes of some Russians.

He had written a number of reports in recent years linking Putin and his inner circle to alleged corruption, and was one of the best-known politicians among Russia’s small and beleaguered opposition.

In 2013, he said as much as $30bn (£20bn) of the estimated $50bn funding for the Winter Olympics in Sochi had gone missing – a claim the Kremlin denied.

Nemtsov’s killing was condemned by world leaders, with the office of the French president, François Hollande, describing it as an assassination.

David Cameron said the callous murder must be “fully, rapidly and transparently investigated”.

On Friday Nemtsov’s daughter Zhanna told CNN that her father had died a hero and that the Russian authorities held political responsibility for the killing.

She said she had no confidence that those responsible for her father’s death would be brought to justice: “Russia has crossed the line after this murder and people will be frightened to express ideas contrary to the official standpoint.”

Putin has called the killing a “provocation”, vowing that everything would be done to convict those who committed a “vile and cynical murder”.

 Labour stops short of ruling out pact with SNP after general election

Caroline Flint said Labour would not ‘take any lectures’ on social values from the Scottish National party, but did not rule out the possibility of a coalition
Caroline Flint (left) with Labour leader Ed Miliband during a visit to Jaguar Land Rover, 16 February 2015
Caroline Flint (left) with Labour leader Ed Miliband during a visit to Jaguar Land Rover, 16 February 2015.

Photograph: Rui Vieira/PA

Press Association

Sunday 8 March 2015 11.36 GMT Last modified on Sunday 8 March 2015 12.19 GMT

    Share on Facebook
    Share on Twitter
    Share via Email
    Share on LinkedIn
    Share on Google+

Shares
71
Comments
701

The Scottish National party is not the “social conscience” of Labour, the shadow energy secretary, Caroline Flint, has said.

But she refused to rule out a coalition after the election, in which Labour is widely predicted to lose most of its seats in Scotland to the SNP.

    We do not want, we do not need and we do not plan to have any coalition with the SNP
    Caroline Flint

Ed Miliband, the Labour leader, and other senior figures within the party have come under increasing pressure to end speculation a deal may be on the cards.

The prime minister has said Miliband should explicitly rule out a deal with the SNP “if he cares about this country”.

David Cameron’s remarks followed a suggestion by former Tory chairman Lord Baker that a grand coalition between the Conservatives and Labour may be necessary to avoid the SNP holding the balance of power at Westminster.

On Sunday Flint said her party would take no lectures from the SNP about how it could “somehow be more progressive then Labour”.

She told The Andrew Marr Show: “We are focused on winning a Labour majority government.

Let me say this: we do not want, we do not need and we do not plan to have any coalition with the SNP.

“There is going to be a choice at this election between who will sit in Number 10.

It is a choice between Labour or the Conservatives forming a majority government.

“Every vote that is cast for the SNP makes it more likely that David Cameron will retain the keys to No 10.
Election 2015: The Guardian poll projection
Read more

“The SNP is not the social conscience of the Labour party.

They might like to see themselves like that but they are not.

“We are the party that will repeal the bedroom tax, we will raise the minimum wage, we will freeze energy prices, a policy the SNP do not support, and we are a party based on our record over 100 years of supporting social justice and success for working people.

“We are the party of the NHS.

We are the party of the minimum wage and we are the party of equality.

We are not going to take any lectures from the SNP about how they can somehow be more progressive than Labour.

That is just not the case.”

Nicola Sturgeon’s party has benefited from a poll surge in recent months which could see them make massive gains in Scotland, potentially casting her as kingmaker following 7 May.

The SNP leader has ruled out supporting a Tory government and said it was unlikely the SNP would enter a formal coalition with Labour in the event of a hung parliament, but indicated her MPs could work with Miliband’s party on an “issue-by-issue basis”.



I see maybe two or three students a year who have what it takes.

There are others who can barely string a sentence together, and I think, “We shouldn’t even be taking your money.” But that’s how the books are balanced.

I hope I respect each writer’s ambition and sincerity, even if I despair of their work.

Not everyone is there to learn to write a novel.

Some are there as therapy, and some to show off how much they’ve read.

I’m most puzzled by the serial students: last year it was pottery, this year it’s a novel.

Why dally with something as unrewarding as publishing if you don’t want to write more than anything else? I identify most with those who burn to write.

Being reminded of my own struggle to get published does make me grateful I’m on this side of the fence now.

I’ve yet to find the new Zadie Smith or David Mitchell, but a few former students have book deals in the pipeline, and I’m excited for them.

There is joy in watching a talented but undisciplined writer shape a sprawling mess into a coherent novel.

There have been tears in class, and that’s awful.

But if you can’t handle constructive criticism from concerned peers, how will you cope with the dogpits of Amazon and Goodreads?

There’s a sense that, if only they can touch the hem of my garment, some of the magic will rub off on them.

What magic? I’m teaching evening classes to make ends meet.

You think I’d be here if I was JK Rowling? They are horrified when I tell them they’ve paid more for this course than the average first-time novelist gets as an advance.

• Tell us what you’re really thinking at mind@theguardian.com
